<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius</title>
                <author><name reg="Dill, Samuel">Samuel Dill</name></author>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date value="2010-10-23">October 23, 2010</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>34122</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <bibl><author><name reg="Dill, Samuel">Samuel Dill</name></author>
                <title>Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius</title>
                    <edition>Second edition</edition>
                    <imprint><pubPlace>London</pubPlace>
                    <publisher>Macmillan and Co.</publisher>
                    <date>1905; reprint 1925</date></imprint>
                </bibl>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="en" />
            <language id="el"/>
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2010-10-23">October 23, 2010</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by <name>Stefan Cramme</name>
                    and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        .center      { text-align: center }
        .Greek       { font-style: normal }
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .right       { text-align: right }
        .small       { font-size: 75% }
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
        head         { text-align: center }
        lg           { margin-left: 2 }
        list.nested  { margin-top: 0; margin-bottom: 0 }
      </pgStyleSheet>
    </pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
<front>
<div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>  
    <titlePage rend="center; page-break-before: always">
        <pb/><anchor id="Pgiii"/>
        <docTitle>
            <titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: xx-large">ROMAN SOCIETY</titlePart><lb/><lb/><lb/>
            <titlePart type="sub">FROM</titlePart><lb/><lb/>
            <titlePart type="sub" rend="font-size: x-large">NERO TO MARCUS AURELIUS</titlePart>
        </docTitle>
        <lb/><lb/><lb/>
        <byline>BY<lb/>
            <docAuthor rend="font-size: large">SAMUEL DILL, M.A.</docAuthor><lb/>
            <hi rend="font-size: small">HON. LITT.D. DUBLIN, HON. LL.D. EDINBURGH, HON. FELLOW AND LATE TUTOR, C.C.C., OXFORD;<lb/>
                PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN QUEEN’S COLLEGE, BELFAST; AUTHOR OF <q>ROMAN SOCIETY<lb/>
                IN THE LAST CENTURY OF THE WESTERN EMPIRE</q></hi>
        </byline>
        <lb/><lb/><lb/>
        <docImprint><publisher>MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED</publisher><lb/>
            <pubPlace>ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON</pubPlace><lb/>
            <docDate>1925</docDate></docImprint>
        
    </titlePage>
    
    <div rend="center; page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id="Pgiv"/>

<p>
COPYRIGHT
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 1em">
<hi rend="italic">First Edition 1904</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="italic">Second Edition 1905</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend="italic">Reprinted December 1905, 1911, 1919, 1920, 1925</hi>
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 3em">
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="v"/><anchor id="Pgv"/>
<index index="toc" level1="Preface"/><index index="pdf" level1="Preface"/>
<head>PREFACE</head>

<p>
There must always be something arbitrary in the choice
and isolation of a period of social history for special study.
No period can, from one point of view, be broken off and isolated
from the immemorial influences which have moulded it, from
the succession of coming ages which it will help to fashion.
And this is specially true of the history of a race at once so
aggressive, yet so tenacious of the past, as the Roman. The
national fibre was so tough, and its tone and sentiment so
conservative under all external changes, that when a man
knows any considerable period of Roman social history, he may
almost, without paradox, be said to know a great deal of it
from Romulus to Honorius.
</p>

<p>
Yet, as in the artistic drama there must be a beginning
and an end, although the action can only be ideally severed
from what has preceded and what is to follow in actual life, so
a limited space in the collective history of a people may be
legitimately set apart for concentrated study. But as in the
case of the drama, such a period should possess a certain
unity and intensity of moral interest. It should be a crisis
and turning-point in the life of humanity, a period pregnant
with momentous issues, a period in which the old order and the
new are contending for mastery, or in which the old is melting
into the new. Above all, it should be one in which the
great social and spiritual movements are incarnate in some
striking personalities, who may give a human interest to dim
forces of spiritual evolution.
</p>

<p>
Such a period, it seems to the writer of this book, is that
<pb n="vi"/><anchor id="Pgvi"/>which he now presents to the reader. It opens with the
self-destruction of lawless and intoxicated power; it closes
with the realisation of Plato’s dream of a reign of the
philosophers. The revolution in the ideal of the principate,
which gave the world a Trajan, a Hadrian, and a Marcus
Aurelius in place of a Caligula and a Nero, may not have
been accompanied by any change of corresponding depth in
the moral condition of the masses. But the world enjoyed
for nearly a century an almost unexampled peace and
prosperity, under skilful and humane government. The civic
splendour and social charities of the Antonine age can be
revived by the imagination from the abundant remains and
records of the period. Its materialism and social vices
will also sadden the thoughtful student of its literature and
inscriptions. But if that age had the faults of a luxurious
and highly organised civilisation, it was also dignified and
elevated by a great effort for reform of conduct, and a
passion, often, it is true, sadly misguided, to rise to a higher
spiritual life and to win the succour of unseen Powers. To
the writer of this book, this seems to give the Antonine age
its great distinction and its deepest interest for the student of
the life of humanity. The influence of philosophy on the
legislation of the Antonines is a commonplace of history.
But its practical effort to give support and guidance to moral
life, and to refashion the old paganism, so as to make it a real
spiritual force, has perhaps hardly yet attracted the notice
which it deserves. It is one great object of this book to
show how the later Stoicism and the new Platonism, working
in eclectic harmony, strove to supply a rule of conduct and a
higher vision of the Divine world.
</p>

<p>
But philosophy failed, as it will probably fail till some
far-off age, to find an anodyne for the spiritual distresses of the
mass of men. It might hold up the loftiest ideal of conduct;
it might revive the ancient gods in new spiritual power; it
might strive to fill the interval between the remote Infinite
<pb n="vii"/><anchor id="Pgvii"/>Spirit and the life of man with a host of mediating and
succouring powers. But the effort was doomed to failure. It
was an esoteric creed, and the masses remained untouched
by it. They longed for a Divine light, a clear, authoritative
voice from the unseen world. They sought it in ever more
blind and passionate devotion to their ancient deities, and in
all the curiosity of superstition. But the voice came to
them at last from the regions of the East. It came through
the worships of Isis and Mithra, which promised a hope of
immortality, and provided a sacramental system to soothe
the sense of guilt and prepare the trembling soul for the
great ordeal on the verge of another world. How far these
eastern systems succeeded, and where they failed, it is one
great purpose of this book to explain.
</p>

<p>
The writer, so far as he knows himself, has had no <hi rend="italic">arrière
pensée</hi> in describing this great moral and spiritual movement.
As M. Boissier has pointed out, the historian of the Antonine
age is free to treat paganism apart from the growth of the
Christian Church. The pagan world of that age seems to
have had little communication with the loftier faith which,
within a century and a half from the death of M. Aurelius,
was destined to seize the sceptre. To Juvenal, Tacitus, and
Pliny, to Plutarch, Dion Chrysostom, Lucian, and M. Aurelius,
the Church is hardly known, or known as an obscure off-shoot
of Judaism, a little sect, worshipping a <q>crucified Sophist</q> in
somewhat suspicious retirement, or more favourably distinguished
by simple-minded charity. The modern theologian
can hardly be content to know as little of the great movement
in the heathen world which prepared or deferred the
victory of the Church.
</p>

<p>
It will be evident to any critical reader that the scope of
this book is strictly limited. As in a former work on the
Society of the later Empire, attention has been concentrated on
the inner moral life of the time, and comparatively little space
has been given to its external history and the machinery
<pb n="viii"/><anchor id="Pgviii"/>of government. The relation of the Senate to the Emperor
in the first century, and the organisation of the municipal
towns have been dwelt on at some length, because they
affected profoundly the moral character of the age. On the
particular field which the writer has surveyed, Dean Merivale,
Dr. Mahaffy, Professor Bury, and Mr. Capes have thrown
much light by their learning and sympathy. But these distinguished
writers have approached the period from a different
point of view from that of the present author, and he believes
that he has not incurred the serious peril of appearing to compete
with them. He has, as a first duty, devoted himself to a complete
survey of the literature and inscriptions of the period.
References to the secondary authorities and monographs which
he has used will be found in the notes. But he owes a special
obligation to Friedländer, Zeller, Réville, Schiller, Boissier,
Martha, Peter, and Marquardt, for guidance and suggestion.
He must also particularly acknowledge his debt to M. Cumont’s
exhaustive work on the monuments of Mithra. Once more
he has to offer his warmest gratitude to his learned friend, the
Rev. Charles Plummer, Fellow of C.C.C., Oxford, for the patience
and judgment with which he has revised the proof sheets. His
thanks are also due to the Messrs. R. and R. Clark’s reader, for
the scrupulous accuracy which has saved the author much time
and labour.
</p>

<dateline rend="text-align: left">
<date><hi rend="italic">September 19, 1904.</hi></date>
</dateline>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="ix"/><anchor id="Pgix"/>
<index index="toc" level1="Contents"/><index index="pdf" level1="Contents"/>
<head>CONTENTS</head>
    
    <p rend="center; font-size: large">BOOK I</p>
    
    <p rend="center">CHAPTER I</p>
    
    <p rend="center; font-size: small">THE ARISTOCRACY UNDER THE TERROR</p>
    
    <p>
        How far the Antonine age is marked by a moral and spiritual revolution—Light 
            which Seneca throws on the moral condition of his class in Nero’s
        reign—Value of his testimony—His pessimism—Human degeneracy the
        result of selfish greed and luxury—Picture of contemporary society—Cruel
        selfishness and the <hi rend="italic">taedium vitae</hi>—The <hi rend="italic">Ardelio</hi>—The terror under which
        Seneca lived—Seneca’s ideal of the principate expounded to Nero in the
        <hi rend="italic">De Clementia</hi>—The character of Nero—Taint in the blood of the Domitii—Nero
        at first showed glimpses of some better qualities—How he was injured
        by the ambition to be an artist—False aestheticism and insane profusion—Feeling
        of Tacitus as to his time—His career—Views as to his impartiality
        as a historian—He was under complex influences—His chief motive as a
        historian—He is not a political doctrinaire—He is avenging a moral, not a
        political ideal—His pessimism—His prejudices and limitations—His ideal
        of education and character—His hesitating religious faith—His credulity
        and his scepticism—His view of the corrupting influence of despotic power—The
        influence of imperial example—Profusion of the early Caesars,
        leading to murder and confiscation in order to replenish their treasury—Dangers
        of life about the court from espionage—Causes of delation—Its
        temptations and its great rewards—The secret of the imperial terror—Various
        theories of it—Was the Senate a real danger?—Its impotence in
        spite of its prestige and claims—The philosophic opposition—Was it really
        revolutionary?—<q>Scelera sceleribus tuenda</q>—The undefined position of
        the principate—Its working depended greatly on the character of the
        Emperor for the time—Pliny’s ideal of the principate—The danger from
        pretenders—Evil effects of astrology—The degradation of the aristocracy
        under Nero and Domitian illustrated from the Pisonian conspiracy—and
        the Year of the Four Emperors—The reign of Domitian—Its puzzling
        character—Its strange contrasts—The terrors of its close—Confiscation and
        massacre—The funereal banquet
    </p>
    <p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg1">1</ref>-57</p>

<pb n="x"/><anchor id="Pgx"/>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER II</p>
    
    <p rend="center; font-size: small">THE WORLD OF THE SATIRIST</p>
    
    <p>
        Juvenal and Tacitus compared—Social position and experience of Juvenal—Juvenal
and Martial deal with the same features of society—Their motives
compared—Character of Martial—The moral standard of Juvenal—His
humanity and his old Roman prejudices—He unites the spirit of two
different ages—His rhetorical pessimism—His sweeping generalisations—Abnormal
specimens become types—Roman luxury at its height—Yet
similar extravagance is denounced for five centuries—Such judgments
need qualification—The great social changes depicted by Juvenal, some
of which he misunderstands—Roman respect for birth—The decay of the
aristocracy and its causes—Aristocratic poverty and servility—How the
early Emperors lowered senatorial dignity—Aristocratic gladiators and
actors—Nero made bohemianism the fashion—<q>The Legend of Bad
Women</q>—Its untrustworthiness and defects of treatment—High ideals of
womanhood among contemporaries of Juvenal—He is influenced by old
Roman prejudice—Juvenal hates the <q>new woman</q> as much as the
vicious woman—The emancipation of women began in the second century
<hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>—Higher culture of women and their growing influence on public
affairs—Juvenal’s dislike of the oriental worships and their female devotees—This
is another old movement—The influence of Judaism at Rome,
even in the Imperial household—Women in Juvenal’s day were exposed
to serious dangers—The corruptions of the theatre and the circus—Intrigues
with actors and slaves—The invasion of Hellenism—Its history—The
Hellenism of the Emperors—The lower Hellenism which Juvenal
attacks—Social and economic causes of the movement—Greek tutors and
professors—The medical profession chiefly recruited from foreigners—The
character of the profession in those days—The astrologer and the parasite—The
client of the early Empire—His degradation and his hardships—General
poverty—The contempt for trade and industry—The growth of
captation—The worship of wealth—The cry of the poor
    </p>
    
    <p rend="text-align: right">Pages <ref target="Pg58">58</ref>-99</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER III</p>
    
    <p rend="center; font-size: small">THE SOCIETY OF THE FREEDMEN</p>
    
    <p>
 The rise of the freedmen a great movement—Roman prejudice against them
expressed in the literature of the age—Economic and social causes of the
movement—Trade and industry despised—The freedmen occupied a vacant
place—Causes of the contempt for them—Their many vices and vulgar
taste—Yet their rise was a hopeful sign—The freedmen in imperial office—The
policy of the early Emperors to employ freedmen in their bureaux—Vitellius
the first Emperor to employ Equites as imperial secretaries—Hadrian
confined the three great ministries to men of equestrian rank—The
great imperial freedmen—Polybius, Claudius Etruscus, and Abascantus—Their
career and their immense power described by Statius—The<pb n="xi"/><anchor id="Pgxi"/>
intrigues and crimes of the freedmen of Claudius—The insolence of Pallas—The
wealth of the freedmen and its sources—Their luxurious display—The
baths of Cl. Etruscus and the gardens of Entellus—Yet the freedmen
were seldom admitted to equal rank with the aristocracy—The Senate
flattered and despised them—The doubtful position of freedwomen—Plebeian
Aspasias—The influence of Acte, Caenis, and Panthea—Manumission—It
was often not a very abrupt change—The better side of slave
life—Trusted and favourite slaves—How they could obtain their freedom—Slaves
employed in offices of trust—The growing <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi>—The close
tie between patron and freedman—The freedman gets a start in trade—His
rapid rise in wealth—His vulgar ostentation—The <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> of
Petronius—Theories as to its motive, date and authorship—Its author
probably the C. Petronius of Nero’s reign—His character in Tacitus—His
probable motive—The literary character and scene of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>—The
character of the Greek adventurers—Trimalchio’s dinner, to which they are
invited—Sketch of Trimalchio’s career—The dinner—Carving to music—Dishes
descend from the ceiling—Wine 100 years old—Confused recollections
of Homer—Hannibal at the Trojan war—Rope-dancers and tales of
witchcraft—The manners of Fortunata—The conversation of some of the
guests—True bourgeois vulgarity—Grumbling about the management of
the aediles—<q>Everything is going back—It all arises from neglect of
religion</q>—The coming gladiatorial show, when there will be plenty of
blood—The education of a freedman’s son—<q>You learn for profit</q>—Fast
and furious—The ladies get drunk, and Trimalchio gives an unflattering
account of his wife’s history—He gives directions to his friend, the stone-cutter,
for the erection of his monument—He has himself laid out for dead,
and the horn-blowers sound his lament
    </p>

<p rend="text-align: right">Pages <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>-137</p>
    
     <p rend="center; font-size: large">BOOK II</p>
    
    <p rend="center">CHAPTER I</p>
    
    <p rend="center; font-size: small">THE CIRCLE OF THE YOUNGER PLINY</p>
    
    <p>
The contrast between the pictures of society in Juvenal and in Pliny—They
belonged to different worlds—They were also of very different temperaments—Moral
contrasts side by side in every age—There were puritan
homes in Italy, even in the worst days—Influence of old Roman tradition
and country life—The circle at Como—Pliny’s youth and early training—Character
of the Elder Pliny—His immense industry—Retreats of old
Roman virtue—The character and reforms of Vespasian—His endowment
of education—The moral influence of Quintilian on Roman youth—Pliny’s
student friends—His relations with the Stoic circle—His reverence for
Fannia—His career at the Bar—He idealises the practice in the Centumviral
court—Career of M. Aquilius Regulus, the great delator and advocate—Pliny’s
passion for fame—The crowd of literary amateurs in his day—Pliny
and Martial—Pliny’s relation to the literary movement of his time—His
<pb n="xii"/><anchor id="Pgxii"/>admiration for Cicero—His reverence for Greece—He once wrote a Greek
tragedy—His apology for his loose verses—His ambition as an orator, and
canons of oratorical style—Pliny’s Letters compared with Cicero’s—The
merits and fame of the Letters—Their arrangement—They are a memorial
of the social life and literary tone of the time—The character of Silius
Italicus—Literary coteries—Pliny’s friendship with Suetonius—The
devotion of literary amateurs to poetic composition and its causes—The
influence of the great Augustan models read at school—Signs of decay
in literature—The growing love of the archaic style—Immense literary
ambition of the time—Attempts of Nero and Domitian to satisfy it by
public literary competitions—The plague of recitations—Pliny believes in
the duty of attending them—The weariness and emptiness of life in the
capital—The charm of the country—Roman country seats on the Anio or
the Laurentine and Campanian shores—The sites of these villas—Their
furniture and decorations—Doubtful appreciation of works of art—The
gardens of the villa—The routine of a country gentleman’s day—The
financial management of an estate—Difficulties with tenants—Pliny’s
kindness to freedmen and slaves—The darker side of slavery—Murder of a
master—Pliny’s views on suicide—Tragedies in his circle—Pliny’s charity
and optimism—The solidarity of the aristocratic class—Pliny thinks it a
duty to assist the career of promising youth—The women of his circle—His
love for Calpurnia and his love letters—The charity and humanitarian
sentiment of the age—<hi rend="italic">Bene fac, hoc tecum feres</hi>—The wealthy recognise
the duties of wealth—Charitable foundations of the emperors—Pliny’s
lavish generosity, both private and public—Yet he is only a shining
example among a crowd of similar benefactors in the Antonine age        
    </p>

<p rend="text-align: right">Pages <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>-195</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER II</p>
    
    <p rend="center; font-size: small">MUNICIPAL LIFE</p>
    
    <p>
Little known of country town life from Roman literature—Yet the love of the
country was strong—A relief from the strain of the capital, which, however,
always maintained its attraction—The Empire a realm of cities—Immense
development of urban life in the first two centuries—The rise of
Thamugadi in Numidia—Great tolerance of municipal freedom under the
early Empire—Yet there was a general drift to uniformity of organisation—Influence
of the capital—The rage for travel—Travelling became easy and
luxurious—Posting facilities on the great roads—The speed of travelling
by land and sea—Growth of towns—Many sprang from the <hi rend="italic">canabae legionis</hi>—History
of Lambesi—Aristocratic or timocratic character of municipal
organisation—Illustrated by the <hi rend="italic">album Canusii</hi>—The sharp demarcation
of social grades—Yet, in the first century, the Commons had still considerable
power—Examples from Pompeii—The magistracies and popular
election—The <hi rend="italic">honorarium</hi> payable on admission to office—The power of
the duumvirs—Position of the Curia—The mode of filling its ranks—Local
Equites—The origin and position of the Augustales—Their organisation
and their importance in the Roman world—Municipal finance—Direct
taxation in the first century almost unknown—Sources of municipal
<pb n="xiii"/><anchor id="Pgxiii"/>revenue—The objects of expenditure—Municipal mismanagement, as in
Bithynia—Signs of decay in Trajan’s reign—First appointment of <hi rend="italic">Curatores</hi>—Immense
private munificence—Examples from Pompeii, which was
only a third rate town—Other instances—Pliny—The Stertinii—Herodes
Atticus, the prince of benefactors—Testimony of the Inscriptions—Example
of imperial liberality—The public works of the Flavian and Antonine
Emperors—Feasts to the populace—Distributions of money, graduated
according to social rank—The motives of this munificence were mixed—Yet
a high ideal of the duties of wealth—The better side of municipal life—Local
patriotism and general kindly feeling—But there is another side
to the picture—Immense passion for amusement, which was often debasing—Games
and spectacles on 135 days in the year—Description of a scene
in the amphitheatre in the Antonine age—Passion for gladiatorial shows
especially in Campania—Remains of gladiatorial barracks at Pompeii—Advertisements
of games—Pictures on tombs and on the walls—The shows
in small country towns—Shows at Cremona a few days after the battle of
Bedriacum—Greece was little infected with the taste—The feeling of the
philosophers—Statistics as to the cost of a gladiatorial show—How the
ranks of the profession were recruited—Its attractions—Organisation of the
gladiatorial schools—The gladiator in retirement—How municipal benefactors
were honoured—Municipal life begins to lose its attractions—The
causes of this—Plutarch on municipal duty—The growth of centralisation—The
beginning of the end       
    </p>
<p rend="text-align: right">Pages <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>-250</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER III</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">THE COLLEGES AND PLEBEIAN LIFE</p>

<p>The <hi rend="italic">plebs</hi> of the municipal town chiefly known from the Inscriptions—Great
development of a free proletariat—The effects of manumission—The artisan
class in the Inscriptions—Their pride in their callings—Emblems on their
tombs—Early history of the <hi rend="italic">Collegia</hi>—Rigorous restraint of their formation
by Julius and Augustus—The evidence of Gaius—Dangers from the
colleges not imaginary—Troubles in the reign of Aurelian—Yet the great
movement could not be checked—The means of evading the law—Extended
liberty in reigns of M. Aurelius and Alexander Severus—The social forces
behind the movement of combination—The wish for funeral rites and
lasting remembrance—Evidence of the Inscriptions—The horror of loneliness
in death—The funerary colleges—That of Lanuvium shows how the
privilege granted to them might be extended—Any college might claim it—Description
of the college at Lanuvium—Its foundation deed—The fees—The
grants for burial—The college of Aesculapius and Hygia—Its
organisation for other objects than burial—Any college might assume a
quasi-religious character—The influence of religion on all ancient social
organisation—The colleges of traders—Wandering merchants organise
themselves all over the world—And old soldiers—Colleges of youth for
sporting purposes—Every branch of industry was organised in these
societies—Evidence from Ostia, Lyons, and Rome, in the Inscriptions—Clubs
of slaves in great houses, and in that of the Emperor—They were
<pb n="xiv"/><anchor id="Pgxiv"/>encouraged by the masters—The organisation of the college was modelled
on the city—Its officers bear the names of republican magistrates—The
number of members limited—Periodical revision of the <hi rend="italic">Album</hi>—Even in
the plebeian colleges the gradation of rank was observed—Patrons carefully
sought for—Meeting-place of the college—Description of the <hi rend="italic">Schola</hi>—Sacred
associations gathered round it—Even the poorest made presents to
decorate it—The poor college of Silvanus at Philippi—But the colleges
relied on the generosity of patrons—Their varying social rank—Election of
a patron—A man might be a patron of many colleges—The college often
received bequests to guard a tomb, and perform funerary rites for ever—The
common feasts of the colleges—The division of the <hi rend="italic">sportula</hi> by ranks—Regulations
as to decorum at college meetings—The college modelled on
the family—Mommsen’s opinion—Fraternal feeling—The slave in the
college, for the time, treated as an equal—Yet the difference of rank, even
in the colleges, was probably never forgotten—Were the colleges really
charitable foundations?—The military colleges—Their object, not only to
provide due burial, but to assist an officer throughout his career—The
extinction of a college—The college at Alburnus in Dacia vanishes probably
in the Marcomannic invasion</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>-286</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: large">BOOK III</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER I</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">THE PHILOSOPHIC DIRECTOR</p>

<p>The great change in the motive and character of philosophy—The schools forsook
metaphysical speculation, and devoted themselves to the cultivation of
character—Why faith in abstract thought declined, and the conduct of life
became all important—The effect of the loss of free civic life and the establishment
of world-empires—The commonwealth of man—The great <hi rend="italic">ars vivendi</hi>—Spiritual
directors before the imperial times—They are found in
every great family—The power of Seneca as a private director of souls—How
his career and experience prepared him for the office—He had seen the
inner life of the time, its sensuality, degradation, and remorse—He was
himself an ascetic, living in a palace which excited Nero’s envy—His experience
excited an evangelistic passion—His conception of philosophy as the
art of saving souls—His contempt for unpractical speculation—Yet he
values Physics for its moral effect in elevating the mind to the region of
eternal truth—Curious examples of physical study for moral ends—The
pessimism of Seneca—Its causes in the inner secrets of his class—It is a
lost world which must be saved by every effort—Stoicism becomes transfigured
by moral enthusiasm—Yet can philosophic religion dispense with
dogma?—Empirical rules of conduct are not enough—There must be true
theory of conduct—Seneca not a rigorous dogmatist—His varying conceptions
of God—Often mingles Platonic conceptions with old Stoic
<pb n="xv"/><anchor id="Pgxv"/>doctrine—But all old Stoic doctrine can be found in him—<q>The kingdom
of Heaven is within</q>—Freedom is found in renunciation, submission to
the Universal Reason—Whence comes the force of self-reform?—The
problem of freedom and necessity—How man may attain to moral
freedom—The struggle to recover a primeval virtue—Modifications of old
Stoic theory—The ideal <hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi>—Instantaneous conversion—Ideas fatal to
practical moral reform—For practical purposes, Stoic theory must be
modified—The <hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi> a mythical figure—There may be various stages of
moral progress—Aristotelian ideas—Seneca himself far from the ideal of the
Stoic sage—The men for whom Seneca is providing counsel—How their
weaknesses have to be dealt with—The <q>ars vitae</q> develops into
casuistry in the hands of the director—Obstacles in the way to the higher
life—Seneca’s skill in dealing with different cases—His precepts for reform—Necessity
of confession, self-examination, steadiness of purpose, self-denial—<hi rend="italic">Vivere militare est</hi>—The real victor—The mind can create its own
world, and triumph even over death—Seneca’s not the Cynic ideal of
moral isolation—Competing tendencies in Stoicism—Isolated renunciation
and social sympathy—A citizen of two cities—The great commonwealth of
humanity—The problem of serving God and man variously solved by the
Stoics—Seneca’s ideas of social duty—Social instinct innate—Duty of help,
forgiveness, and kindness to others—The example of the Infinite Goodness—The
brotherhood of man includes the slave—Seneca’s attitude to slavery—His
ideal of womanhood—Women may be the equals of men in culture
and virtue—The greatness of Seneca as a moral teacher—He belongs to the
modern world, and was claimed by the Church—A pagan Thomas à
Kempis</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg289">289</ref>-333</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER II</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">THE PHILOSOPHIC MISSIONARY</p>

<p>Seneca the director of an aristocratic class—The masses needed a gospel—Their
moral condition—The Antonine age produced a great movement for
their moral elevation—Lucian’s attitude to the Cynics—His kindred with
them—Detached view of human life and its vanity—Gloomy view of the
moral state of the masses—The call for popular evangelism—Can philosophy
furnish the gospel?—Lucian’s Hermotimus—The quarrels of the
schools—Yet they show real agreement on the rule of life—The fashionable
sophist—Rhetorical philosophy despised by more earnest minds—Serious
preaching—The sermons of Apollonius of Tyana—Sudden conversions—The
preaching of Musonius, Plutarch, and Maximus of Tyre—The mystic
fervour of Maximus—Dion’s view of the Cynic preacher—The <q>mendicant
monks of paganism</q>—Lucian’s caricature of their vices—Many vulgar
impostors adopt the profession—It offered a tempting field—Why the
charges against the Cynics must be taken with reserve—S. Augustine’s
testimony—Causes of the prejudice against Cynicism—Lucian’s treatment
of Peregrinus—The history of Peregrinus—The credibility of the charges
which Lucian makes against him—He is about to immolate himself at
Olympia when Lucian arrives—Lucian treats the self-martyrdom as a piece
<pb n="xvi"/><anchor id="Pgxvi"/>of theatrical display—Yet Peregrinus may have honestly desired to teach
contempt for death—Stoic suicide—The scene at the pyre—The last words
of Peregrinus—Lucian creates a myth and sees it grow—Testimony of A.
Gellius as to Peregrinus—The power of the later Cynicism—The ideal Cynic
in Epictetus—An ambassador of God—Kindred of Cynicism and Monasticism—Cultivated
Cynics—The character of Demetrius, a leader of the
philosophic opposition—Cynic attitude to popular religion—Oenomaus a
pronounced rationalist—Disbelief in oracles—The character of Demonax—His
great popular influence—Prosecuted for neglect of religious observances—His
sharp sayings—Demonstrations of reverence for him at his death—The
career of Dion Chrysostom—His conversion during his exile—Becomes
a preacher with a mission to the Roman world—The character of his eighty
orations—He is the rhetorical apostle of a few great truths—His idea of
philosophy—His pessimism about the moral state of the world—A
materialised civilisation—Warning to the people of Tarsus—Rebukes the
feuds of the Bithynian cities—A sermon at Olbia on the Black Sea—The
jealousies of the Asiatic towns—Prusa and Apamea—Sermon on civic
harmony—He assails the vices and frivolity of the Alexandrians—His
prose idyll—Simple pastoral life in Euboea—The problems and vices of city
life exposed—Dion on true kingship—The vision of the Two Peaks—The
ideal king—The sermon at Olympia inspired by the Zeus of Pheidias—Its
majesty and benignity—Sources of the idea of God—The place of art in
religion—Relative power of poetry and sculpture to express religious truth—Pheidias
defends his anthropomorphism—His Zeus a God of mercy and
peace</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg334">334</ref>-383</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER III</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">THE PHILOSOPHIC THEOLOGIAN</p>

<p>The pagan revival and the growth of superstition called for a theodicy—Old
Roman religion was still powerful—But there was an immense accretion
of worships from the conquered countries—And an immense growth in the
belief in genii, dreams, omens, and oracles—Yet amid the apparent chaos,
there was a tendency, in the higher minds, to monotheism—The craving
for a moral God in sympathy with man—The ideas of Apuleius, Epictetus,
M. Aurelius—The change in the conception of God among the later Stoics—God
no longer mere Force or Fate or impersonal Reason—He is a Father
and Providence, giving moral support and comfort—The attitude of the
later Stoics to external worship and anthropomorphic imagery—How was
the ancient worship to be reconciled with purer conceptions of the Divine?—God
being so remote, philosophy may discover spiritual help in all the
religions of the past—The history of Neo-Pythagoreanism—Apollonius
of Tyana—His attitude to mythology—His mysticism and ritualism—Plutarch’s
associations and early history—His devotion to Greek tradition—His
social life—His Lives of the great Greeks and Romans—He is a
moralist rather than a pure philosopher—The tendency of philosophy in his
day was towards the formation of character—The eclecticism of the time—Plutarch’s
attitude to Platonism and Stoicism—His own moral system
was drawn from various schools—Precepts for the formation of
character—<pb n="xvii"/><anchor id="Pgxvii"/>Plutarch on freedom and necessity—His contempt for rhetorical philosophy—Plutarch
on Tranquillity—How to grow daily—The pathos of life—The
need for a higher vision—How to reconcile the God of philosophy with the
ancient mythology was the great problem—Plutarch’s conception of God—His
cosmology mainly that of the <hi rend="italic">Timaeus</hi>—The opposition between the
philosophic idea of God and the belief of the crowd was an old one—Yet
great political and spiritual changes had made it a more urgent question—The
theology of Maximus of Tyre—His pure conception of God, combined
with tolerance of legend and symbolism—Myth not to be discarded, but
interpreted by philosophy, to discover the kernel of truth which is
reverently veiled—The effort illustrated by the treatise of Plutarch on
Isis and Osiris—Its theory of Evil and daemonic powers—The Platonist
daemonology—The history of daemons traced from Hesiod—The conception
of daemons justified by Maximus—The daemonology of the early Greek
philosophers—The nature of daemons as conceived by Maximus and
Plutarch—The ministering spirits of Maximus—The theory of bad daemons
enabled Plutarch to explain the grossness of myth and ritual—The
bad daemons a <hi rend="italic">damnosa hereditas</hi>—The triumphant use made of the
theory by the Christian Apologists—The daemonology of Plutarch was
also used to explain the inspiration or the silence of the ancient oracles—<q>The
oracles are dumb</q>—Yet in the second century, to some extent,
Delphi revived—Questions as to its inspiration debated—The quality of
Delphic verse—The theory of inspiration—Concurrent causes of it—The
daemon of the shrine may depart—The problem of inspiration illustrated
by a discussion on the daemon of Socrates—What was it?—The result of
the inquiry is that the human spirit, at its best, is open to influences from
another world</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg384">384</ref>-440</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: large">BOOK IV</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER I</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">SUPERSTITION</p>

<p>Superstition a term of shifting meaning—Plutarch’s treatise on Superstition—Why
it is worse than atheism—Immense growth of superstition in the
first century, following on a decay of old religion—Forgotten rites and
fallen temples—The revival of Augustus—The power of astrology—The
Emperors believed in it and dreaded it—Tiberius and Thrasyllus at
Capreae—The attitude of Nero, Otho, and Vitellius to astrology—The
superstition of the Flavian Emperors—And of Hadrian and M. Aurelius—The
superstition of the literary class—The Elder Pliny—Suetonius—Tacitus—His
wavering treatment of the supernatural—How it may be
explained by the character of the age—Epictetus on divination—The
superstition of Aelian of Praeneste—His credulity and his anathemas
on the sceptics—P. Aelius Aristides—His history and character—His
illness of thirteen years—Was he a simple devotee?—The influence of
<pb n="xviii"/><anchor id="Pgxviii"/>rhetorical training on him—The temples of healing in his time—Their
organisation and routine—Recipes by dreams in the temples of Asclepius,
Isis, and Serapis—Medical skill combined with superstition—The amusements
and cheerful social life of these temple-hospitals were powerful
healers—The ailments of Aristides and his journeys in quest of health—Strange
divine prescriptions astonish the medical attendants—Their own
heroic remedies—Epiphanies of the Gods—The return of his rhetorical
power—The debt is repaid in the Sacred Orations—The treatise on dreams
by Artemidorus—His idea of founding a science of dreams—His enormous
industry in collecting materials—His contempt for less scientific interpreters—His
classification of dreams and methods of interpretation—The
new oracles—The failure of the old was not so complete as it is sometimes
represented—The revival of Delphi—The history of the oracle of Alexander
of Abonoteichos—His life and character—How he played on the
superstition of the Paphlagonians—The business-like management of the
oracle—Its fees and revenue—Its secret methods—Its fame spreads everywhere—Oracles
in many tongues—Rutilianus, a great noble, espouses
Alexander’s daughter—The Epicureans resist the impostor, but in vain—The
mysteries of Glycon—Alexander, a second Endymion—Immense
superstition of the time—Apotheosis in the air—The cult of Antinous—And
of M. Aurelius—In Croton there were more gods than men!—The
growing faith in daemons and genii—The evidence of inscriptions as to the
adoption of local deities all over the world—Revived honours of classic
heroes—The belief in recurring miracle—Christian and pagan were equally
credulous—The legend of the <q>Thundering Legion</q>—Sorcery in Thessaly—The
lawless romance of Apuleius</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg443">443</ref>-483</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER II</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY</p>

<p>The conception of immortality determined by the idea of God—Religion supplies
the assurance denied by philosophy—Vagueness of the conception natural
and universal—<q>It doth not yet appear what we shall be</q>—Confused and
various beliefs on the subject in the Early Empire—The cult of the Manes
in old Italian piety—The guardianship of the tomb, and call for perpetual
remembrance—The eternal sleep—The link between the living and the dead—The
craving for continued human sympathy with the shade in its eternal
home—The Lemures and the Lemuria—Visitations from the other world—The
<hi rend="italic">Mundus</hi> in every Latin town—The general belief in apparitions illustrated
from the <hi rend="italic">Philopseudes</hi> of Lucian, from the Younger Pliny, Suetonius,
Dion Cassius, and Maximus of Tyre—The eschatology of Virgil a mixture
of different faiths—Scenes from the Inferno of the <hi rend="italic">Aeneid</hi>—Its Pythagorean
elements—How Virgil influenced later conceptions of the future state—Scepticism
and credulity in the first century—Perpetuity of heathen
beliefs—The inscriptions, as to the future state, must be interpreted with
care and discrimination—The phrases often conventional, and springing
from different orders of belief—Inscriptions frankly atheistic or sensualist—Ideas
of immortality among the cultivated class—The influence of
<pb n="xix"/><anchor id="Pgxix"/>Lucretius—The Stoic idea of coming life, and the Peripatetic—The
influence of Platonism—In the last age of the Republic, and the first of the
Empire, educated opinion was often sceptical or negative—J. Caesar, the
Elder Pliny, Tacitus—The feeling of Hadrian—Epictetus on immortality—Galen—His
probable influence on M. Aurelius—The wavering attitude of
M. Aurelius on immortality—How he could reconcile himself by a saintly
ideal to the resignation of the hope of a future life—His sadness and
pessimism fully justified by the circumstances of the time—<q>Thou hast
come to shore, quit the ship</q>—Change in the religious character long
before M. Aurelius—Seneca’s theology as it moulded his conception of
immortality—A new note in Seneca—The influence of Pythagorean and
Platonic conceptions in modifying Stoicism—The revival of Pythagoreanism
in the first century—Its tenets and the secret of its power—Apollonius of
Tyana on immortality—His meeting with the shade of Achilles—Plutarch
and Maximus of Tyre on immortality—Plutarch’s arguments for the faith
in it—The Delays of Divine Vengeance—But, like Plato, Plutarch feels
that argument on such a subject must be reinforced by poetic imagination—The
myths of Thespesius of Soli and Timarchus in Plutarch—Mythic
scenery of the eternal world</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg484">484</ref>-528</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER III</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">THE OLD ROMAN RELIGION</p>

<p>The decay of old religion in the last age of the Republic—Its causes—Influence
of Greek philosophy and rationalism—Distinction drawn between the
religion of philosophy and that of the State—The moral and religious
results—Sceptical conformity or desuetude of ancient rites—The religious
revival of Augustus—How far a matter of policy—Ancient temples
and worships restored—The position of Pontifex Maximus—How the
Emperors utilised the dignity and kept a firm hold on the old religion—The
religious character of the early Emperors—The force of antiquarian
sentiment in the second century—The Inscriptions plainly show that the
popular faith in old Latin religion was still strong—The revival of the
Arval brotherhood—Its history and ritual described—A stronghold of
imperial power—How the Arval College supported and flattered the
Emperors—How the cultivated class reconciled themselves to the rudest
forms of the ancient religion—The philosophic reconciliation—The influence
of patriotism in compelling men to support a religion which was intertwined
with all social and political life—The sentiment powerful down to the
end of paganism—But other religious ideas were in the air, preparing the
triumph of the cults of the East</p>

<p rend="right"><ref target="Pg529">529</ref>-546</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER IV</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">MAGNA MATER</p>

<p>The fascination of the worship of the Great Mother—It was still powerful in
the days of S. Augustine—Its arrival from Pessinus in 204 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>—The
<pb n="xx"/><anchor id="Pgxx"/>history of its growing influence—The taurobolium in the second century—The
legend and its interpretations—The Megalesia in spring—The priesthood—The
sacred colleges of the worship—Evidence of the Inscriptions—The
worship in country places—Vagabond priests in Thessaly described by
Apuleius—Picture of their wild orgies—The problem of these eastern
cults—From a gross origin, they became transmuted into a real spiritual
power—The elevation of Magna Mater—The rite of the taurobolium—Its
history in Asia Minor—Its immense influence in the last age of the
Empire—A challenge to the Church—The history of the taurobolium in
the West from the Inscriptions—Description of the scene from Prudentius—The
connection of Magna Mater with Mithra and other deities</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg547">547</ref>-559</p>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER V</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">ISIS AND SERAPIS</p>

<p>Their long reign in Europe—Established at Peiraeus in the fourth century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>—And
in Asia Minor—How the Egyptian cults had been transformed
under Greek influences—Greek settlers, soldiers, and travellers in Egypt
from the seventh century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>—Greek and Egyptian gods identified—The
new propaganda of the Ptolemies—Theories of the origin of Serapis—The
new Egyptian Trinity—The influence of Greek mysticism—The worship
probably established in Campanian towns before 150 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>—The religious
excitement in Italy in the early part of the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>—The
Bacchanalian scandal—The apocryphal books of Numa—Efforts of the
Government in the first century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> to repress the worship—A violent
struggle with varying fortunes—The triumvirs in 42 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> erect a temple
of Isis—Persecution of eastern worships in the reign of Tiberius—Thenceforth
there was little opposition—Attitude of the Flavian Emperors—Domitian
builds a temple of Isis, 92 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>—The Egyptian worship
propagated from Alexandria by slaves, officials, philosophers, and savants—Votaries
in the imperial household—Spread of Isiac worship through
Europe—It reaches York—The secret of its fascination—The cult
appealed to many kinds of mind—Its mysticism—Its charm for women—Its
pomp and ceremonial—How a religion originally gross may be transformed—The
zoolatry of Egypt justified as symbolism by Greek philosophers—But
there is little trace of it in the Isiac worship of the West—Isis
becomes an all-embracing spiritual power—And Serapis is regarded by
Aristides as sovereign lord of life—Yet the worship never broke away from
the traditions of idolatry—It fostered an immense superstition—The
Petosiris—But there was undoubted spiritual power in the worship—The
initiation of Lucius—The faith in immortality—<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εὐψύχει</foreign> on tombs—Impressive
ritual—Separation of the priesthood from the world—Description
of the daily offices—Matins and Vespers—Silent meditation—The great
festivals of the Isiac calendar—Ascetic preparation—The blessing of the
sacred ship—Description of the procession in Apuleius—The grades of
priests—The sacred guilds—The place of women—The priesthood an
aggressive power—The Isiac presbytery—Priestly rule of life—Tertullian
holds it up as an example—The popular charm of the Divine Mother</p>

<p rend="right"><anchor id="corrxx"/><corr sic="560-584">Pages <ref target="Pg560">560</ref>-584</corr></p>

<pb n="xxi"/><anchor id="Pgxxi"/>

<p rend="center">CHAPTER VI</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">THE RELIGION OF MITHRA</p>

<p>The causes which in the second century <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> prepared the triumph of Mithra—Heliolatry
the natural goal of heathenism—Early history of Mithra
in the Vedas and Avestas—He is a moral power from the beginning—His
place in the Zoroastrian hierarchy—His relation to Ormuzd—The
influence of Babylon on the Persian worship—Mithra identified with
the Sun—The astral lore of Babylonia inseparable from Mithraism—Yet
Mithra and the Sun are distinct in the later Inscriptions—How Mithra
worship was modified in Asia Minor—The influence of Greek mythology,
philosophy, and art—The group of the Tauroctonus probably first
fashioned by a Pergamene artist—Mithra in literature—Herodotus—Xenophon—The
<hi rend="italic">Thebaid</hi> of Statius—Plutarch—Lucian may have heard
the Mazdean litany—Mithra’s first coming to the West probably in the
reign of Tiberius—The earliest inscriptions of Mithraism belong to the
Flavian age—At the same time, the worship is established in Pannonia—The
earliest temples at Ostia and Rome—The power of Mithra in the
capital—The secret of the propaganda—Soldiers were the most effective
missionaries of Mithra—Slaves and imperial officials of every degree
propagate the Persian faith—Its progress traced around Rome and through
various regions of Italy, especially to the north—Mithra’s chapels in the
valleys of the Alps and on the roads to the Danube from Aquileia—Along
the line of the Danube—His remains abundant in Dacia and Pannonia—Chapels
at Aquincum and Carnuntum—The enthusiasm of certain
legions—The splendid remains of Mithra worship in Upper Germany in
the early part of the second century <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>—Mithra passes on, through
Cologne and Boulogne, to London, Chester, York and the wall of
Hadrian—Mithra made least impression on W. Gaul, Spain, and N.
Africa—In spite of tolerance and syncretism, Mithraism never ceased to be
a Persian cult—The influence of astrology—The share of Babylonia in
moulding the worship—Yet Greek mystic influences had a large part in it—The
descent and ascent of the soul—Yet, although Mithraism came to
be a moral creed, it never ceased to be a cosmic symbolism—The great
elemental powers—The daemonology of Mithraism—Its affinity with the
later Neo Platonism—The evil effect of belief in planetary influences—The
struggle between formal and spiritual ideals of religion—The craving for
mediatorial sympathy in the moral life was urgent—Mithra was a mediator
both in a cosmic and a moral sense—He stands between Cautes and
Cautopates, and between Ormuzd and Ahriman—The legend of Mithra as
faintly recovered from the monuments—The <hi rend="italic">petra genetrix</hi>—The adoration
of the shepherds—The fountain gushing at the arrow stroke—The legend
of the mystic bull—Its chase and slaughter—Its death as the source of
resurgent life—The mysterious reconciliation of Mithra and the Sun—Their
solemn agape—Various interpretations of the legend—Yet there was
a real spiritual meaning under it all—A religion of strenuous combat—How
it touched the Roman soldier on the Danube—Its eschatology—Its
promise of immortality and final triumph over evil—The sacramental
mystery of Mithraism—The daily offices, and the annual festivals—The
<pb n="xxii"/><anchor id="Pgxxii"/>mysteries of Mithra and the seven grades of initiation—Symbolic
ceremonies—The colleges of Mithra—Their influence in levelling social
distinctions—The suspicions of the Apologists—Description of a chapel of
Mithra—The form of the cave always preserved—The scene of full
initiation—Mithraism as an imperial cult and a support of imperial power—Sketch
of the history of imperial apotheosis—The historic causes which
aided it—The influence of Egypt and Persia on the movement—The
Persian attitude to kings—The Fortune of the monarch—How these ideas
blended with old Roman conceptions—The influence of Sun-worship in the
third century, in stimulating theocratic ideas—The Emperors appropriate
the titles and insignia of the Sun—The imperial house consecrate a temple
to Mithra at Carnuntum, twenty years before the conversion of Constantine—Could
Mithra ever have become the god of western Europe?—His
chances of success in the chaos of belief seemed promising—His syncretism
and tolerance, yet his exclusive claims—His moral charm—The fears of
the Fathers—Parallels between his legend and the Bible—His sacramental
system a travesty of the mysteries of the medieval church—Yet there
was a great gulf between the two religions—The weaknesses of Mithraism—It
did not appeal to women—It had no Mater Dolorosa—It offered little
human sympathy—And in its tolerance of other heathen systems lay its
great weakness—A Mithraist might be a votary of all the ancient gods—Mithraism
was rooted in nature-worship, and remained the patron of the
worst superstitions—Mithra belonged to the order which was passing
away</p>

<p rend="right">Pages <ref target="Pg585">585</ref>-626</p>
        
    </div>
</front>
<body>
    <div type="book" n="1" rend="page-break-before: right">
        <pb/><anchor id="Pgxxiii"/>
        <index index="toc" level1="Book I. Infesta virtutibus tempora"/><index index="pdf" level1="Book I. Infesta virtutibus tempora"/>
        <head>BOOK I.</head>
        
        <head type="sub"><hi rend="italic">INFESTA VIRTUTIBUS TEMPORA</hi></head>
        
        <pb/><anchor id="Pgxxiv"/>
              
        <div type="chapter" n="1" rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="1"/><anchor id="Pg1"/>
<index index="toc" level1="I. The aristocracy under the terror"/><index index="pdf" level1="I. The aristocracy under the terror"/>
<head>CHAPTER I</head>

<head type="sub">THE ARISTOCRACY UNDER THE TERROR</head>

<p>
The period of social history which we are about to study is
profoundly interesting in many ways, but not least in the
many contrasts between its opening and its close. It opens
with the tyranny of one of the worst men who ever occupied
a throne; it ends with the mild rule of a Stoic saint. It
begins in massacre and the carnage of civil strife; it closes
in the apparent triumph of the philosophic ideal, although
before the end of the reign of the philosophers the shadows
have begun to fall. The contrast of character between the two
princes is generally supposed to find a correspondence in the
moral character and ideals of the men over whom they ruled.
The accession of Vespasian which, after a deadly struggle, seemed
to bring the orgies of a brutal despotism to a close, is regarded
as marking not only a political, but a moral, revolution. It was
the dawn of an age of repentance and amendment, of beneficent
administration, of a great moral revival. We are bound to
accept the express testimony of a contemporary like
Tacitus,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55; xvi. 5; cf.
    Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> ix. xii.</note>
who was not prone to optimist views of human progress, that
along with the exhaustion of the higher class from massacre
and reckless extravagance, the sober example of the new
emperor, and the introduction of fresh blood and purer manners
from the provinces, had produced a great moral improvement.
Even among the old noblesse, whose youth had fallen on the
age of wild licence, it is probable that a better tone asserted
itself at the beginning of what was recognised by all to be a
new order. The crushed and servile, who had easily learnt to
<pb n="2"/><anchor id="Pg2"/>imitate the wasteful vices of their oppressors, would probably,
with equal facility, at least affect to conform to the simpler
fashions of life which Vespasian inherited from his Sabine ancestors
and the old farm-house at Reate.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> ii. quare princeps
    quoque et locum incunabulorum assidue
    frequentavit, manente villa, qualis
    fuerat olim, etc.</note> The better sort, represented
by the circles of Persius, of Pliny and Tacitus, who had
nursed the ideal of Stoic or old Roman virtue in some retreat
on the northern lakes or in the folds of the Apennines, emerged
from seclusion and came to the front in the reign of Trajan.
</p>

<p>
Yet neither the language of Tacitus nor the testimony from
other sources justify the belief in any sudden moral revolution.
The Antonine age was undoubtedly an age of conscientious
and humane government in the interest of the subject; it was
even more an age of religious revival. But whether these
were accompanied by a corresponding elevation of conduct and
moral tone among the masses may well be doubted. On the
other hand the pessimism of satirist and historian who had
lived through the darkness of the Terror has probably
exaggerated the corruption of the evil days. If society at
large had been half as corrupt as it is represented by Juvenal,
it would have speedily perished from mere rottenness. The
Inscriptions, the Letters of the younger Pliny, even the pages
of Tacitus himself, reveal to us another world from that of
the satirist. On countless tombs we have the record or
the ideal of a family life of sober, honest industry, and pure
affection. In the calm of rural retreats in Lombardy or
Tuscany, while the capital was frenzied with vicious indulgence,
or seething with conspiracy and desolated by massacre,
there were many families living in almost puritan quietude,
where the moral standard was in many respects as high as
among ourselves. The worst period of the Roman Empire was
the most glorious age of practical Stoicism. The men of that
circle were ready, at the cost of liberty or life, to brave an
immoral tyranny; their wives were eager to follow them into
exile, or to die by their side.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 23; xvi. 21, 34; <hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi>
    2, 45; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 16, § 10; vii. 19,
    § 3; iii. 11, § 3; ix. 13, § 3.</note> And even in the palace of Nero
there was a spotless Octavia, and slave-girls who were ready to
defend her honour at the cost of torture and death.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 60.</note> In the
darkest days, the violence of the bad princes spent itself on
<pb n="3"/><anchor id="Pg3"/>their nobles, on those whom they feared, or whom they wished
to plunder. The provinces, even under a Tiberius, a Nero, or
a Domitian, enjoyed a freedom from oppression which they
seldom enjoyed under the Republic.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 6; i. 80; xiii. 50, 51;
    xi. 24; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, x.; <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> viii.; cf.
    Merivale, vii. 385; Renan, <hi rend="italic">Apôtres</hi>, p.
    308 sqq; Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Morale de Plut.</hi> p. 200.</note> Just and upright governors
were the rule and not the exception, and even an Otho
or a Vitellius, tainted with every private vice, returned from
their provincial governments with a reputation for integrity.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> v.; <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, iii. provinciam
    administravit moderatione atque
    abstinentia singulari.</note>
Municipal freedom and self-government were probably at their
height at the very time when life and liberty in the capital
were in hourly peril. The great Stoic doctrine of the brotherhood
and equality of men, as members of a world-wide
commonwealth, which was destined to inspire legislation in
the Antonine age, was openly preached in the reigns of Caligula
and Nero. A softer tone—a modern note of pity for the
miserable and succour for the helpless—makes itself heard in
the literature of the first century.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, i. 5; iii. 24;
    <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> iv. 11, § 3; <hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi>
    xiii. § 7; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 22; Juv. xiv. 15
    sqq.; xv. 131; D. Cass. lxvi. 15; <hi rend="italic">Or.
        Henz. Inscr. Lat.</hi> 7244, Bene fac, hoc
    tecum feres; Denis, <hi rend="italic">Hist. des Idées
        Morales</hi>, ii. 156, 172, 181.</note> The moral and mental
equality of the sexes was being more and more recognised in
theory, as the capacity of women for heroic action and self-sacrifice
was displayed so often in the age of the tyranny and
of the Stoic martyrs. The old cruelty and contempt for the
slave will not give way for many a generation; but the slave is
now treated by all the great leaders of moral reform as a being
of the same mould as his master, his equal, if not his superior,
in capacity for virtue.
</p>

<p>
The peculiar distinction of the Antonine age is not to be
sought in any great difference from the age preceding it in conduct
or moral ideals among the great mass of men. Nor can
it claim any literary distinction of decided originality, except
in the possession of the airy grace and half-serious mockery
of Lucian. Juvenal, Tacitus, and the younger Pliny, Suetonius
and Quintilian, Plutarch and Dion Chrysostom, were probably all
dead before Antoninus Pius came to the throne. After Hadrian’s
reign pure Roman literature, in any worthy sense, is extinct;
it dies away in that Sahara of the higher intellect which
stretches forward to the Fall of the Empire. There is no great
<pb n="4"/><anchor id="Pg4"/>historian after Tacitus; there is no considerable poet after
Statius and Juvenal, till the meteor-like apparition of Claudian
in the ominous reign of Honorius.
</p>

<p>
The material splendour and municipal life of the Antonine
age are externally its greatest glory. It was pre-eminently a
sociable age, an age of cities. From the wall of Hadrian to
the edge of the Sahara towns sprang up everywhere with as
yet a free civic life. It was an age of engineers and architects,
who turned villages into cities and built cities in the desert,
adorned with temples and stately arches and basilicas, and
feeding their fountains from the springs of distant hills. The
rich were powerful and popular; and never had they to pay
so heavily for popularity and power. The cost of civic feasts
and games, of forums and temples and theatres, was won by
flattery, or extorted by an inexorable force of public opinion
from their coffers. The poor were feasted and amused by their
social superiors who received a deference and adulation expressed
on hundreds of inscriptions. And it must be confessed
that these records of ambitious munificence and expectant
gratitude do not raise our conception of either the economic
or the moral condition of the age.
</p>

<p>
The glory of classic art had almost vanished; and yet,
without being able to produce any works of creative genius,
the inexhaustible vitality of the Hellenic spirit once more
asserted itself. After a long eclipse, the rhetorical culture of
Greece vigorously addressed itself in the reign of Hadrian to
the conquest of the West. Her teachers and spiritual directors
indeed had long been in every family of note. Her sophists
were now seen haranguing crowds in every town from the Don
to the Atlantic. The influence of the sophistic discipline in
education will be felt in the schools of Gaul, when Visigoth
and Burgundian will be preparing to assume the heritage of
the falling Empire.<note place="foot">Sid. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 6, § 5.</note> From the early years of the second
century can be traced that great combined movement of the
Neo-Pythagorean and Platonist philosophies and the renovated
paganism which made a last stand against the conquering
Church in the reigns of Julian and Theodosius. Philosophy
became a religion, and devoted itself not only to the private
direction of character and the preaching of a higher life, but
<pb n="5"/><anchor id="Pg5"/>to the justification and unification of pagan faith. In spite
of its rather bourgeois ideal of material enjoyment and splendour,
the Antonine age, at least in its higher minds, was
an age of a purified moral sense and religious intuition. It
was, indeed, an age of spiritual contradictions. On the one
hand, not only was the old ritual of classical polytheism
scrupulously observed even by men like Plutarch and M.
Aurelius, but religious imagination was appropriating the
deities of every province, almost of every canton, embraced by
the Roman power. At the same time the fecundity of superstition
created hosts of new divinities and genii who peopled
every scene of human life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> iii. Ind. p. 27 sq.</note> On the other hand syncretism
was in the air. Amid all the confused ferment of devotion
a certain principle of unity and comprehension was asserting
itself, even in popular religion. The old gods were losing
their sharp-cut individuality; the provinces and attributes of
kindred deities tended to fade into one another, and melt into
the conception of a single central Power. The religions of Egypt
and the remoter East, with their inner monotheism, supported
by the promise of sacramental grace and the hope of immortality,
came in to give impetus to the great spiritual movement.
The simple peasant might cling to his favourite god, as his
Neapolitan descendant has his favourite saint. But an Apuleius,
an Apollonius, or an Alexander Severus<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> c. 55, sacrorum pleraque
    initia in Graecia participavi, et
    plurimos ritus ... didici; Lamprid.
    <hi rend="italic">Alex. Sev.</hi> c. 29, 43.</note> sought a converging
spiritual support in the gods and mysteries of every clime.
</p>

<p>
Platonist philosophy strove to give rational expression to
this movement, to reconcile cultivated moral sense with the
worships of the past, to find a bond between the vagrant religious
fancies of the crowd and the remote esoteric faith of the
philosophic few. On the higher minds, from whatever quarter,
a spiritual vision had opened, which was strange to the ancient
world, the vision of One who is no longer a mere Force, but
an infinite Father, Creator, Providence and Guardian, from
whom we come, to whom we go at death. Prayer to Him is a
communion, not the means of winning mere temporal blessings;
He is not gratified by bloody sacrifice; He is dishonoured by
immoral legend.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii.; xi. § 3;
    xvii.; D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 83.</note> He cannot be imaged in gold or ivory graven
<pb n="6"/><anchor id="Pg6"/>by the most cunning hand, although the idealised human form
may be used as a secondary aid to devotion. These were some
of the religious ideas current among the best men, Dion Chrysostom,
Plutarch, Maximus of Tyre, which the Neo-Platonic
school strove to harmonise with the rites and legends of the
past. The means by which they tried to do so, and the measure
of their success, it is one purpose of this book to explain.
</p>

<p>
The Antonine age saw for a brief space the dream of Plato
realised, when kings should be philosophers, and philosophers
should be kings. Philosophy had given up its detached and
haughty reserve, or outspoken opposition to imperial power.
In the second century it lent all its forces to an authority
which in the hands of the Antonine princes seemed to answer
to its ideals.<note place="foot">Renan, <hi rend="italic">Les Évangiles</hi>, p. 382.</note> The votaries of the higher life, after their
persecution under the last cruel despot, rose to an influence
such as they had never wielded save in the Pythagorean aristocracies
of southern Italy. Philosophy now began to inspire
legislation and statesmanship.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iv. 420; Denis,
<hi rend="italic">Idées Morales</hi>, ii. 200 sqq.; Renan, <hi rend="italic">M.
Aurèle</hi>, p. 24 sqq.</note> Its professors were raised to
the consulship and great prefectures. Above all, it was
incarnate, as it were, in the ruler who, whatever we may think
of his practical success, brought to the duties of government a
loftiness of spiritual detachment which has never been equalled
by any ruler of men. Whether there was any corresponding
elevation of conduct or moral tone in the mass of men may
well be doubted by any one who has studied the melancholy
thoughts of the saintly emperor. Lucian and M. Aurelius
seem to be as hopeless about the moral condition of humanity
as Seneca and Petronius were in the darkest days of Nero’s
tyranny.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Som.</hi> 32; <hi rend="italic">Traj.</hi> 15; <hi rend="italic">Charon</hi>,
15, 20; <hi rend="italic">Tim.</hi> 14, 36; M. Aurel. v. 10,
33: ix. 29; 34; x. 19: cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De
Ira</hi>, ii. 8; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> ii. 17, 20, 22;
Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 88.</note> Such opinions, indeed, have little scientific value.
They are often the result of temperament and ideals, not of
trustworthy observation. But it would be rash to assume
that heightened religious feeling and the efforts of philosophy
had within a hundred years worked any wide-spread transformation
of character. It was, however, a great step in
advance that the idea of the principate, expounded by Seneca,
and the younger Pliny, as a clement, watchful, infinitely
<pb n="7"/><anchor id="Pg7"/>laborious earthly providence had been realised since the accession
of Trajan. It was easier to be virtuous in the reign
of M. Aurelius than in the reign of Nero, and it was especially
easier for a man of the highest social grade. The
example of the prince for good or evil must always powerfully
influence the class who are by birth or office nearest to the
throne. And bad example will be infinitely more corrupting
when it is reinforced by terror. A fierce, capricious tyranny
generates a class of vices which are perhaps more degrading
to human dignity, and socially more dangerous, than the
vices of the flesh. And the reign of such men as Caligula,
Nero, and Domitian not only stimulated the grossness of self-indulgence,
but superadded the treachery and servility of
cowardice. In order to appreciate fully what the world had
gained by the mild and temperate rule of the princes of the
second century, it is necessary to revive for a moment the
terrors of the Claudian Caesars.
</p>

<p>
The power of Seneca as a moral teacher has, with some
reservations, been recognised by all the ages since his time.
But equal recognition has hardly been given to the lurid
light which he throws, in random flashes, on the moral conditions
of his class under the tyranny of Caligula and Nero.
This may be due, perhaps, to a distrust of his artificial
declamation, and that falsetto note which he too often strikes
even in his most serious moments. Yet he must be an unsympathetic
reader who does not perceive that, behind the
moral teaching of Seneca, there lies an awful experience, a lifelong
torture, which turns all the fair-seeming blessings of
life, state and luxury and lofty rank, into dust and ashes.
There is a haunting shadow over Seneca which never
draws away, which sometimes deepens into a horror of darkness.
In whatever else Seneca may have been insincere, his
veiled references to the terrors of the imperial despotism
come from the heart.
</p>

<p>
Seneca’s life almost coincides with the Julio-Claudian
tyranny. He had witnessed in his early manhood the gloomy,
suspicious rule of Tiberius, when no day passed without an
execution,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 22; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> lxi. nullus a poena hominum cessavit dies.</note> when every accusation was deadly, when it might be
fatal for a poet to assail Agamemnon in tragic verse, or for a
<pb n="8"/><anchor id="Pg8"/>historian to praise Brutus and Cassius,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 61; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 34.</note> when the victims of
delation in crowds anticipated the mockery of justice by self-inflicted
death, or drank the poison even in the face of the
judges. Seneca incurred the jealous hatred of Caligula by a
too brilliant piece of rhetoric in the Senate,<note place="foot">D. Cass. lix. 19; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 53.</note> and he has taken
his revenge by damning the monster to eternal infamy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nec. Inj.</hi> xviii.; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi>
50; Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, i. 20; iii. 18; <hi rend="italic">De
Tranq.</hi> xiv.; <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> xiii. xvii.; <hi rend="italic">Ad
Helv.</hi> x. 4; <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> iv. 31.</note> Not
even in Suetonius is there any tale more ghastly than that told
by Seneca of the Roman knight whose son had paid with his
life for a foppish elegance which irritated the tyrant.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 33.</note> On the
evening of the cruel day, the father received an imperial command
to dine. With a face betraying no sign of emotion, he
was compelled to drink to the Emperor, while spies were eagerly
watching every expression of his face. He bore the ordeal
without flinching. <q>Do you ask why? He had another son.</q>
Exiled to Corsica in the reign of Claudius,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 8; D. Cass. 60. 8;
61. 10; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> 13. 2; <hi rend="italic">Ad
Helv.</hi> 15. 2.</note> Seneca bore the
sentence with less dignity than he afterwards met death. He
witnessed the reign of the freedmen, the infamies of Messalina,
the intrigues of Agrippina, and the treacherous murder of
Britannicus; he knew all the secrets of that ghastly court.
Installed as the tutor of the young Nero, he doubtless, if we
may judge by the treatise on Clemency, strove to inspire him
with a high ideal of monarchy as an earthly providence. He
probably at the same time discovered in the son of Cn.
Domitius Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the fatal heritage of a
vicious blood and the omens of a ghastly reign. The young
tiger was held on leash for the famous quinquennium by
Burrus and Seneca. It seemed only the device of a divine
tragic artist, by a brief space of calm and innocence, to deepen
the horror of the catastrophe. And, for Seneca, life darkened
terribly towards its close. With high purposes for the commonweal,
he had probably lent himself to doubtful means of
humouring his wayward pupil, perhaps even to crime.<note place="foot">For the worst charges <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> D. Cass.
lxii. 2; lxi. 10; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 13. 13.</note> His
enormous wealth, whether won from imperial favour, or gained
by usury and extortion,<note place="foot">D. Cass. <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi>; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 13. 42.
But cf. Seneca’s reply, Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 14.
53, and 15. 62.</note> his power, his literary brilliance, aroused
<pb n="9"/><anchor id="Pg9"/>a host of enemies, who blackened his character and excited the
fears or the jealousy of Nero. He had to bear the unenviable
distinction of a possible pretender to the principate.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 15. 65.</note> He withdrew
into almost monastic seclusion, and even offered to resign
his wealth.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> 108.</note> He strove to escape the evil eyes of calumny and
imperial distrust by the most abject renunciation. But he could
not descend from the precipice on which he hung; his elevation
was a crucifixion.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> x. 6.</note> Withdrawn to a remote corner of his
palace, which was crowded with the most costly products of the
East, and surrounded by gardens which moved the envy of
Nero,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 18; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 14. 52.</note> the fallen statesman sought calm in penning his counsels
to Lucilius, and bracing himself to meet the stealthy stroke
which might be dealt at any moment.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 70, § 14; 88, § 17; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77;
<hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 15; <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> 5, § 4.</note> In reading many
passages of Seneca, you feel that you are sitting in some
palace on the Esquiline, reading the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> or listening to the
consolations of a Stoic director, while the centurion from
the palace may at any moment appear with the last fateful
order.
</p>

<p>
Seneca, like Tacitus, has a remarkable power of moral
diagnosis. He had acquired a profound, sad knowledge of
the pathology of the soul. It was a power which was almost
of necessity acquired in that time of terror and suspicion,
when men lived in daily peril from seeming friends. There
never was a period when men more needed the art of reading
the secrets of character. Nor was there ever a time when
there were greater facilities for the study. Life was sociable
almost to excess. The Roman noble, unless he made himself
deliberately a recluse, spent much of his time in those social
meeting-places of which we hear so often,<note place="foot">Mart. vii. 27, 11; Juv. xi. 4; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Dial.</hi> 1, 5, 4; <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> vii. 22, 2;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 281.</note> where gossip and
criticism dealt mercilessly with character, where keen wits
were pitted against one another, sometimes in a deadly game,
and where it might be a matter of life or death to pierce the
armour of dissimulation.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 33; <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> xii. 7.</note> Seneca had long shone in such circles.
In his later years, if he became a recluse, he was also a spiritual
director. And his Letters leave little doubt that many a restless
or weary spirit laid bare its secret misery to him, for advice or
<pb n="10"/><anchor id="Pg10"/>consolation. Knowing well the wildest excesses of fantastic
luxury, all the secrets of the philosophic confessional, the
miseries of a position oscillating between almost princely state
and monastic renunciation, the minister of Nero, with a self-imposed
cure of souls, had unrivalled opportunities of ascertaining
the moral condition of his class.
</p>

<p>
Seneca is too often a rhetorician, in search of striking
effects and vivid phrase. And, like all rhetoricians, he is often
inconsistent. At times he appears to regard his own age as
having reached the very climax of insane self-indulgence. And
yet, in a calmer mood, he declares his belief that the contemporaries
of Nero were not worse than the contemporaries of
Clodius or Lucullus, that one age differs from another rather
in the greater prominence of different vices.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 97, § 2; Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi>
i. 10, § 1. Cf. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95,
§ 20; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 115, § 10.</note> His pessimism
extends to all ages which have been allured by the charm of
ingenious luxury from the simplicity of nature. In the fatal
progress of society, the artificial multiplication of human wants
has corrupted the idyllic innocence of the far-off Eden, where
the cope of heaven or the cave was the only shelter, and the
skin-clad savage made his meal on berries and slaked his thirst
from the stream.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 42.</note> It is the revolutionary dream of Rousseau,
revolting from the oppression and artificial luxury of the <hi rend="italic">Ancien
Régime</hi>. Seneca’s state of nature is the antithesis of the
selfish and materialised society in which he lived. Our early
ancestors were not indeed virtuous in the strict sense.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 40.</note> For
virtue is the result of struggle and philosophic guidance. But
their instincts were good, because they were not tempted.
They enjoyed in common the natural bounties of mother earth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 90, § 38.</note>
Their fierceness of energy spent itself on the beasts of the
chase. They lived peaceably in willing obedience to the
gentle paternal rule of their wisest and best, with no lust of
gold or power, no jealousy and hatred, to break a contented
and unenvious harmony. The great disturbers of this primeval
peace were avarice and luxury.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 90, § 5, § 36, avaritia atque
luxuria dissociavere mortales.</note> The moment when the first
nugget flashed its baleful temptations on the eyes of the
roaming hunter was the beginning of all human guilt and
misery.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 90, § 12.</note> Selfish greed, developing into insatiable appetite, is
<pb n="11"/><anchor id="Pg11"/>the original sin which turned the garden into wilderness.
In individualist cravings men lost hold on the common wealth
of nature. Luxury entered on its downward course, in the
search for fresh food and stimulus for appetite, till merely superfluous
pleasures led on to those from which untainted nature
recoils.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 19.</note> Man’s boasted conquests over nature, the triumphs
of his perverted ingenuity, have bred an illimitable lust,
ending in wearied appetite; they have turned those who were
brothers into cunning or savage beasts.
</p>

<p>
Such a theory of society has, of course, no value or interest
in itself. Its interest, like that of similar <hi rend="italic">à priori</hi> dreams,
lies in the light which it sheds on the social conditions which
gave it birth. Like the Germany of Tacitus, and the Social
Contract of Rousseau, Seneca’s theory of the evolution of
humanity is an oblique satire on the vices of his own age.
And not even in Tacitus or Suetonius are to be found more
ghastly revelations of a putrescent society, and the ennui and
self-loathing which capricious sensualism generates in spirits
born for something higher. It may be worth noting that the
vices which Seneca treats as most prevalent and deadly are
not so much those of sexual impurity, although they were rife
enough in his day, as those of greed, gross luxury, treacherous
and envious cruelty, the weariness of jaded nerves and exhausted
capacities of indulgence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi> xvi. tarde ire horas
    queruntur; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 104, § 15.</note> It is not the coarse vices of the
Suburra, but the more deadly and lingering maladies of the
Quirinal and the Esquiline which he is describing. There is a
universal lust of gold:<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 115, § 10; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 33; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
    60; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 74.</note> riches are the one ornament and stay
of life. And yet in those days a great fortune was only a
splendid servitude.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> vi. 5, magna servitus est
    magna fortuna.</note> It had to be guarded amid perpetual
peril and envy. The universal greed and venality are worthily
matched by the endless anxiety of those who have won the
prize. Human life has become a scene of cruel and selfish
egotism, a ferocious struggle of beasts of prey, eager for rapine,
and heedless of those who go down in the obscene struggle.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8.</note>
It is an age when men glorify the fortunate and trample on
the fallen. The cunning and cruelty of the wild beast on the
throne have taught a lesson of dissimulation to the subject.
    <pb n="12"/><anchor id="Pg12"/>At such a court it is a miracle to reach old age, and the feat
can only be accomplished by accepting insult and injury with
a smiling face.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 33.</note> For him who goes undefended by such
armour of hypocrisy there is always ready the rack, the
poisoned cup, the order for self-murder. It is characteristic
of the detachment of Seneca that he sees the origin of this
hateful tyranny. No modern has more clearly discerned the
far-reaching curse of slavery.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 35, deinde idem de republica
libertatem sublatam quereris
quam domi sustulisti.</note> Every great house is a
miniature of the Empire under a Caligula or Nero, a nursery
of pretenders capable of the same enormities. The unchecked
power of the master, which could, for the slightest faults, an ill-swept
pavement, an unpolished dish, or a sullen look, inflict the
most brutal torture,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 24, 32; Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 49,
53; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47, § 10; Juv. vi. 490;
Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 18.</note> produced those cold hearts which gloated
over the agony of gallant men in the arena, and applauded
in the Senate the tyrant’s latest deed of blood. And the
system of household slavery enervated character while it made
it heartless and cruel. The Inscriptions confirm Seneca’s
picture of the minute division of functions among the household,
to anticipate every possible need or caprice of the master.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 353; Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 142; Wallon, <hi rend="italic">L’Escl. dans
l’Ant.</hi> ii. 146.</note>
Under such a system the master became a helpless dependent.
There is real truth, under some ludicrous exaggeration, in the
tale of a Roman noble, taking his seat in his sedan after the
bath, and requiring the assurance of his slave that he was
really seated.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Brev.</hi> <hi rend="italic">V.</hi> xiii.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is little wonder that on such lives an utter weariness
should settle, the disgust of oversated appetite, which even the
most far-fetched luxuries of the orient, the most devilish
ingenuity of morbid vice, could hardly arouse. Yet these
jaded souls are tortured by an aimless restlessness, which frets
and chafes at the slow passing of the hours,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvi. transilire dies volunt.</note> or vainly hopes
to find relief in change of scene.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 104, § 15; 89, § 20; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 28.</note> The more energetic spirits,
with no wholesome field for energy, developed into a class
which obtained the name of <q>Ardeliones.</q> Seneca,<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> xii. § 7.</note> Martial,<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 7, 8 (<hi rend="italic">v.</hi> note on the word
in Friedländer’s ed.); iv. 78.</note>
and the younger Pliny<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 9; cf. Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi>
i. 271.</note> have left us pictures of these idle
<pb n="13"/><anchor id="Pg13"/>busybodies, hurrying round the forums, theatres, and great
houses, in an idle quest of some trivial object of interest,
waiting on patrons who ignore their existence, following some
stranger to the grave, rushing pell-mell to the wedding of a
much-married lady, or to a scene in the law courts, returning at
nightfall, worn out with these silly labours, to tread the same
weary round next day. Less innocent were they who daily
gathered in the <hi rend="italic">circuli</hi>,<note place="foot">Juv. xi. 4; Mart. vii. 97; Quintil.
vi. 3, 105; Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> xii. § 7;
<hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> vii. 22, 2; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> i. 5, 4;
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 201 sqq.</note> to hear and spread the wildest rumours
about the army on the frontier, to kill a woman’s reputation
with a hint, to find a sinister meaning in some imperial order,
or to gloat in whispers over the last highly-coloured tale of
folly or dark guilt from the palace. It was a perilous enjoyment,
for, with a smiling face, some seeming friend was probably
noting every hint which might be tortured into an
accusation before the secret tribunal on the Palatine, or
angling for a sneer which might cost its author a fortune, or
send him to the rocks of Gyarus.
</p>

<p>
In reading Seneca’s writings, especially those of his last
years, you are conscious of a horror which hardly ever takes
definite shape, a thick stifling air, as it were, charged with
lightning. Again and again, you feel a dim terror closing in
silently and stealthily, with sudden glimpses of unutterable
torture, of cord and rack and flaming tunic.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xx.; <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> x.; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
94 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 70.</note> You seem to see
the sage tossing on his couch of purple under richly <anchor id="corr13"/><corr sic="pannelled">panelled</corr>
ceilings of gold, starting at every sound in the wainscot,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 43, at vos ad omnem
tectorum pavetis sonum et inter
picturas vestras, si quid increpuit,
fugitis attoniti.</note> as he
awaits the messenger of death. It is not so much that
Seneca fears death itself, although we may suspect that his
nerves sometimes gave the lie to his principles. He often
hails death as welcome at any age, as the deliverer who strikes
off the chain and opens the prison door, the one harbour on a
tempestuous and treacherous sea.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 70, § 14; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, § 17, malis
paratus sum; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 11; <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi>
ix. nullus portus nisi mortis; <hi rend="italic">Ad
Marc.</hi> xx. mors quae efficit ut nasci non
supplicium sit.</note> He is grateful for having
always open this escape from life’s long torture, and boldly
claims the right to anticipate the executioner. The gloom of
Seneca seems rather to spring from a sense of the terrible con<pb n="14"/><anchor id="Pg14"/>trast between wealth and state and an ignominious doom which
was ever ready to fall. And to his fevered eye all stately rank
seems at last but a precipice overhanging the abyss, a mark for
treacherous envy or the spitefulness of Fortune.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> x.</note> <q>A great
fortune is a great servitude,</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> vi.</note> which, if it has been hard to
win, is harder still to guard. And all life is full of these
pathetic contrasts. Pleasure is nearest neighbour to pain; the
summer sea in a moment is boiling in the tempest; the labour
of long years is scattered in a day; there is always terror lurking
under our deepest peace. And so we reach the sad gospel of
a universal pessimism; <q>nothing is so deceitful and treacherous
as the life of man.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xxii. § 3.</note> No one would knowingly accept such a
fatal gift, of which the best that can be said is that the torture
is short, that our first moment of existence is the first stage to
the grave.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> ix.; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xxi. § 7.</note> Thus to Seneca, with all his theoretical indifference
to things external to the virtuous will, with all his admiration
for the invulnerable wisdom, withdrawn in the inner citadel of
the soul, and defying the worst that tyrants or fortune could
inflict, the <hi rend="italic">taedium vitae</hi> became almost unendurable. The
interest of all this lies, not in Seneca’s inconsistency, but in the
nightmare which brooded on such minds in the reign of Nero.
</p>

<p>
Something of the gloom of Seneca was part of the evil
heritage of a class, commanding inexhaustible wealth and
assailed by boundless temptations to self-indulgence, which
had been offered by the conquest of East and West. The
weary senses failed to respond to the infinite sensual seductions
which surrounded the Roman noble from his earliest years.
If he did not succeed in squandering his fortune, he often
exhausted too early his capacity for healthy joy in life, and
the nemesis of sated appetite and disillusionment too surely
cast its shadow over his later years. Prurient slander was
rife in those days, and we are not bound to accept all its
tales about Seneca. Yet there are passages in his writings
which leave the impression that, although he may have
cultivated a Pythagorean <anchor id="corr14"/><corr sic="aceticism">asceticism</corr> in his youth,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 17. He adopted the
Pythagorean discipline under the influence
of Sotion, a pupil of Sextius,
but gave it up on the proscription of
suspected rites in the reign of Tiberius,
cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 36; cf. Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Die Phil.
der Gr.</hi> iii. 1, 605.</note> he did not
<pb n="15"/><anchor id="Pg15"/>altogether escape the taint of his time.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 62. 2; 61. 10. Zeller, iii.
1, 641, n. 1.</note> His enormous
fortune did not all come by happy chance or the bounty of
the emperor.<note place="foot">D. Cass. <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi></note> His gardens and palace, with all its priceless
furniture, must have been acquired because at one time he
felt pleasure in such luxuries. A soul so passionate in its
renunciation may, according to laws of human nature, have
been once as passionate in indulgence. In his case, as so
often in the history of the Church, the saint may have had a
terrible repentance.
</p>

<p>
It is probable, however, that this pessimism is more the
result of the contrast between Seneca’s ideal of the principate,
and the degradation of its power in the hands of his pupil
Nero. Seneca may have been regarded once as a possible
candidate for the throne, but he was no conspirator or revolutionary.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Tac. Ann.</hi> xv. 55.</note>
He would have condemned the visionaries
whose rudeness provoked even the tolerant Vespasian.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> 15.</note> In a
letter, which must have been written during the Neronian
terror, he emphatically repudiates the idea that the votaries of
philosophy are refractory subjects. Their great need is quiet
and security. They should surely reverence him who, by his
sleepless watch, guards what they most value, just as, on a
merchantman, the owner of the most precious part of the
cargo will be most grateful for the protection of the god
of the sea.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 73, § 3.</note> Seneca would have his philosophic brethren
give no offence by loud self-assertion or a parade of superior
wisdom.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 103, § 4.</note> In that deceitful dawn of his pupil’s reign, Seneca
had written a treatise in which he had striven to charm him
by the ideal of a paternal monarchy, in the consciousness of
its god-like power ever delighting in mercy and pity, tender to
the afflicted, gentle even to the criminal. It is very much the
ideal of Pliny and Dion Chrysostom under the strong and
temperate rule of Trajan.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 19; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> i. 72;
D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> ii. § 77; iii. § 39; 70
sqq.</note> Addressed to one of the worst
emperors, it seems, to one looking back, almost a satire. Yet
we should remember that, strange as it may seem, Nero,
with all his wild depravity, appears to have had a strange
charm for many, even to the end. The men who trembled
<pb n="16"/><anchor id="Pg16"/>under the sombre and hypocritical Domitian, regretted the
wild gaiety and bonhomie of Nero, and each spring, for
years after his death, flowers were laid by unknown hands
upon his grave.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> <anchor id="corr16"/><corr sic="23,">23;</corr> <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, 57; cf. Tac.
<hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 7, ipsa aetas Galbae irrisui ac
fastidio erat adsuetis juventae Neronis
et imperatores forma ac decore corporis
... comparantibus.</note> The charm of boyhood, with glimpses of
some generous instincts, may for a time have deceived even
the experienced man of the world and the brooding analyst of
character. But it is more probable that the piece is rather a
warning than a prophecy. Seneca had watched all the caprices
of an imperial tyrant, drunk with a sense of omnipotence,
having in his veins the maddening taint of ancestral vice,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 50; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Nec. Inj.</hi>
18; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, i. 20; ii. 33; iii. 18; <hi rend="italic">De
Ben.</hi> ii. 12, 21.</note>
with nerves unstrung by maniacal excesses, brooding in the vast
solitudes of the Palatine till he became frenzied with terror,
striking down possible rivals, at first from fear or greed,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 38.</note> in the
end from the wild beast’s lust for blood, and the voluptuary’s
delight in suffering. The prophecy of the father as to the
future of Agrippina’s son<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, 6.</note> found probably an echo in the fears
of his tutor. But, in spite of his forebodings, Seneca thought
the attempt to save him worth making. He first appeals to
his imagination. Nero has succeeded to a vicegerency of God
on earth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 1, § 2, electusque sum
qui in terris deorum vice fungerer.</note> He is the arbiter of life and death, on whose word
the fortunes of citizens, the happiness or misery of whole
peoples depend.  His innocence raises the highest hopes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. § 5.</note>
But the imperial task is heavy, and its perils are appalling.
The emperor is the one bond by which the world-empire is
held together;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 4, 1, ille vinculum per quod
respublica cohaeret, ille spiritus vitalis.</note> he is its vital breath. Man, the hardest of all
animals to govern,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 17, 1.</note> can only be governed long by love, and love
can only be won by beneficence and gentleness to the frowardness
of men. In his god-like place, the prince should imitate
the mercy of the gods.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 7, 2.</note> Wielding illimitable power, he is yet
the servant of all, and cannot usurp the licence of the private
subject. He is like one of the heavenly orbs, bound by inevitable
law to move onward in a fixed orbit, unswerving and
unresting. If he relies on cruel force, rather than on
clemency, he will sink to the level of the tyrant and meet
<pb n="17"/><anchor id="Pg17"/>his proper fate.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 12.</note> Cruelty in a king only multiplies his
enemies and envenoms hatred. In that fatal path there is no
turning back. The king, once dreaded by his people, loses
his nerve and strikes out blindly in self-defence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 13, 2, scelera enim sceleribus
tuenda sunt.</note> The
atmosphere of treachery and suspicion thickens around him,
and, in the end, what, to his maddened mind, seemed at first a
stern necessity becomes a mere lust for blood.
</p>

<p>
It has been suggested that Seneca was really, to some extent,
the cause of the grotesque or tragic failure of Nero.<note place="foot">Renan, <hi rend="italic">L’Antéchr.</hi> p. 125.</note> The
rhetorical spirit, which breathes through all Seneca’s writings,
may certainly be an evil influence in the education of a ruler
of men. The habit of playing with words, of aiming at
momentary effect, with slight regard to truth, may inspire the
excitable vanity of the artist, but is hardly the temper for
dealing with the hard problems of government. And the
dazzling picture of the boundless power of a Roman emperor,
which Seneca put before his pupil, in order to heighten his
sense of responsibility, might intoxicate a mind naturally prone
to grandiose visions, while the sober lesson would be easily
forgotten. The spectacle of <q>the kingdoms of the world and
all the glory of them</q> at his feet was a dangerous temptation
to a temperament like Nero’s.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 1, § 2, egone ex omnibus
mortalibus placui electusque sum
qui in terris deorum vice fungerer?</note> Arrogance and cruelty were
in the blood of the Domitii. Nero’s grandfather, when only
aedile, had compelled the censor to give place to him; he
had produced Roman matrons in pantomime, and given gladiatorial
shows with such profusion of cruelty, as to shock that
not very tender-hearted age.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 4.</note> The father of the emperor, in
addition to crimes of fraud, perjury, and incest, had, in the
open forum, torn out the eye of a Roman knight, and deliberately
trampled a child under his horse’s feet on the Appian
Way.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 5.</note> Yet such is the strange complexity of human nature,
that Nero seems by nature not to have been destitute of some
generous and amiable qualities. We need not lay too much
stress on the innocence ascribed to him by Seneca.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 1, § 5.</note> Nor need
we attribute to Nero’s initiative the sound or benevolent measures
which characterised the beginning of his reign. But he showed
<pb n="18"/><anchor id="Pg18"/>at one time some industry and care in performing his judicial
work.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 15; cf. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> c. viii.</note> He saw the necessity, in the interests of public health
and safety, of remodelling the narrow streets and mean insanitary
dwellings of Rome.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 16.</note> His conception of the Isthmian
canal, if the engineering problem could have been conquered,
would have been an immense boon to traders with the Aegean.
Even his quinquennial festival, inspired by the Greek contests
in music and gymnastic,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 12, instituit et quinquennale
certamen primus omnium Romae more
Graeco triplex, etc.</note> represented a finer ideal of such gatherings,
which was much needed by a race devoted to the coarse
realism of pantomime and the butchery of the arena. Fierce and
incalculably capricious as he could be, Nero, at his best, had
also a softer side. He had a craving for love and appreciation<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 20; 53; Renan, <hi rend="italic">L’Antéchr.</hi>
p. 132.</note>;
some of his cruelty was probably the revenge for the denial
of it. He was singularly patient of lampoons and invective
against himself.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 39.</note> Although he could be brutal in his treatment
of women, he also knew how to inspire real affection, and perhaps
in a few cases return it. He seems to have had something of
real love for Acte, his mistress. His old nurses consoled him
in his last hour of agony, and, along with the faithful Acte,
laid the last of his race in the vault of the Domitii.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 50.</note> Nero
must have had something of that charm which leads women in
every age to forget faults, and even crimes in the men whom
they have once loved. And the strange, lingering superstition,
which disturbed the early Church, and which looked for his
reappearance down to the eleventh century, could hardly have
gathered around an utterly mean and mediocre character.<note place="foot">Renan, <hi rend="italic">L’Antéchr.</hi> p. 316.</note>
</p>

<p>
When Nero uttered the words <q>Qualis artifex pereo,</q><note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 49; Renan, <hi rend="italic">L’Antéchr.</hi>
130. sqq.</note> he
gave not only his own interpretation of his life, he also revealed
one great secret of its ghastly failure. It may be admitted
that Nero had a certain artistic enthusiasm, a real ambition to
excel.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 24, 49, 52, 55; Tac.
<hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 16; cf. Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p.
179; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 265.</note> He painted with some skill, he composed verses not
without a certain grace. In spite of serious natural defects,
he took endless pains to acquire the technique of a singer.
Far into the night he would sit in rapt enthusiasm listening to
<pb n="19"/><anchor id="Pg19"/>the effects of Terpnus, and trying to copy them.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 53, c. 20, cf. c. 24.</note> His artistic
tour in Greece, which lowered him so much in the eyes of the
West, was really inspired by the passion to find a sympathetic
audience which he could not find at Rome. And, in spite of
his arrogance and vanity, he had a wholesome deference for the
artistic judgment of Greece. Yet it is very striking that in the
records of his reign, the most damning accusation is that he
disgraced the purple by exhibitions on the stage. His songs
to the lyre, his impersonation of the parturient Canace or the
mad Hercules, did as much to cause his overthrow as his
murders of Britannicus and Agrippina.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 36, 39;
Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 15, 16; xv. 67, odisse
coepi postquam parricida matris et
uxoris, auriga et histrio et incendiarius
extitisti; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 21; D. Cass.
63. 9, 10.</note> The stout Roman
soldier and the Pythagorean apostle have the same scorn
for the imperial charioteer and actor. A false literary
ambition, born of a false system of education, was the bane
of Roman culture for many ages. The dilettante artist on
the throne in the first century had many a successor in the
literary arts among the grand seigneurs of the fifth. They
could play with their ingenious tricks of verse in sight of
the Gothic camp-fires. He could contend for the wreath at
Olympia when his faithful freedman was summoning him
back by the news that the West was seething with revolt.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nero’s mother had dissuaded him from the study of philosophy;
his tutor debarred him from the study of the manly
oratory of the great days.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 32.</note> The world was now to learn the
meaning of a false artistic ambition, divorced from a sense
of reality and duty. Aestheticism may be only a love of
sensational effects, with no glimpse of the ideal. It may be
a hypocritical materialism, screening itself under divine names.
In this taste Nero was the true representative of his age. It
was deeply tainted with that mere passion for the grandiose
and startling, and for feverish intellectual effects, which a true
culture spurns as a desecration of art.<note place="foot">Merivale, viii. p. 70 sq.; Schiller,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. der Röm. Kaiserzeit</hi>, i. p. 467.</note> Mere magnitude and
portentousness, the realistic expression of physical agony, the
coarse flush of a half-sensual pleasure, captivated a vulgar
taste, to which crapulous excitement and a fever of the
senses took the place of the purer ardours and visions of the
<pb n="20"/><anchor id="Pg20"/>spirit.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 8, where the decay
of artistic sense is traced to the grossness
of evil living; at nos vino scortisque
demersi ne paratas quidem artes
audemus cognoscere.</note> Nero paid the penalty of outraging the conventional
prejudices of the Roman. And yet he was in some respects
in thorough sympathy with the masses. His lavish games
and spectacles atoned to some extent for his aberrations of
Hellenism. He was generous and wasteful, and he encouraged
waste in others,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 11, 12.</note> and waste is always popular till the bill has
to be paid. He was a <q>cupitor incredibilium.</q><note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 15. 42.</note> The province
of Africa was ransacked to find the fabled treasure of Dido.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 16. 1; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, 31.</note>
Explorers were sent to pierce the mysterious barrier of the
Caucasus, and discover the secret sources of the Nile. He had
great engineering schemes which might seem baffling even to
modern skill, and which almost rivalled the wildest dreams of
the lunatic brain of Caligula.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 16, 31.</note> His Golden House, in a park
stretching from the Palatine to the heights of the Esquiline,
was on a scale of more than oriental magnificence. At last
the master of the world was properly lodged. With colonnades
three miles long, with its lakes and pastures and sylvan glades,
it needed only a second Nero in Otho to dream of adding to
its splendour.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 31; cf. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, 7.</note> To such a prince the astrologers might well
predict another monarchy enthroned on Mount Zion, with
the dominion of the East.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 40.</note> The materialist dreamer was, like
Napoleon I., without a rudimentary moral sense. Stained
with the foulest enormities himself, he had a rooted conviction
that virtue was a pretence, and that all men were equally
depraved.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 29 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note> His surroundings gave him some excuse for
thinking so. He was born into a circle which believed chiefly
in <q>the lust of the eye and the pride of life.</q> He formed a
circle many of whom perished in the carnage of Bedriacum.
With a treasury drained by insane profusion, Nero resorted to
rapine and judicial murder to replenish it.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 32; D. Cass. 63. 17.</note> The spendthrift
seldom has scruples in repairing his extravagance. The
temples were naturally plundered by the man who, having no
religion, was at least honest enough to deride all religions.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 56.</note>
The artistic treasures of Greece were carried off by the votary
of Greek art; the gold and silver images of her shrines were
<pb n="21"/><anchor id="Pg21"/>sent to the melting-pot.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 32; D. Cass. 63. 11.</note> Ungrateful testators paid their due
penalty after death; and delation, watching every word or
gesture, skilfully supplied the needed tale of victims for plunder.
It is all a hackneyed story. Yet it is perhaps necessary to
revive it once more to explain the suppressed terror and
lingering agony of the last days of Seneca.
</p>

<p>
The impressions of the Terror which we receive from
Seneca are powerful and almost oppressive. A thick atmosphere
of gloom and foreboding seems to stifle us as we turn
his pages. But Seneca deals rather in shadowy hint and
veiled suggestion than in definite statement. For the minute
picture of that awful scene of degradation we must turn to
Tacitus. He wrote in the fresh dawn of an age of fancied
freedom, when the gloom of the tyranny seemed to have
suddenly vanished like an evil dream. Yet he cannot shake
off the sense of horror and disgust which fifteen years of
ignoble compliance or silent suffering have burnt into his soul.
Even under the manly, tolerant rule of Trajan, he hardly seems
to have regained his breath.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi> c. 3, sic ingenia
studiaque oppresseris facilius quam
revocaveris.</note> He can scarcely believe that
the light has come at last. His attitude to the tyranny is
essentially different from that of Seneca. The son of the
provincial from Cordova views the scene rather as the cosmopolitan
moralist, imperilled by his huge fortune and the
neighbourhood of the terrible palace. Tacitus looks at it as
the Roman Senator, steeped in all old Roman tradition, caring
little for philosophy, but caring intensely for old Roman dignity
and the prestige of that great order, which he had seen humbled
and decimated.<note place="foot">Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 53 sqq.</note> The feeling of Seneca is that of a Stoic monk,
isolated in a corner of his vast palace, now trembling before
the imperial jealousy, which his wealth and celebrity may
draw down upon him, and again seeking consolation in
thoughts of God and eternity which might often seem to
belong to Thomas à Kempis. The tone of Tacitus is sometimes
that of a man who should have lived in the age of the
Samnite or the Carthaginian wars, before luxury and factious
ambition had sapped the moral strength of the great aristocratic
caste, while his feelings are divided between grim anger at
<pb n="22"/><anchor id="Pg22"/>a cruel destiny, and scornful regret for the weakness and the
self-abandonment of a class which had been once so great.
The feelings of Seneca express themselves rather in rhetorical
self-pity. The feelings of Tacitus find vent in words which
sometimes veil a pathos too proud for effusive utterance, sometimes
cut like lancet points, and which, in their concentrated
moral scorn, have left an eternal brand of infamy on names
of historic renown.
</p>

<p>
More than forty years had passed between the date of
Seneca’s last letters to Lucilius and the entry of Tacitus on his
career as a historian.<note place="foot">Seneca died in 65 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> The
<hi rend="italic">Histories</hi> of Tacitus were published
<hi rend="italic">circ.</hi> 106-107; cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 20;
Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 42.</note> He was a child when Seneca died.<note place="foot">Tacitus was born about 55 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>
(Peter, ii. 43; Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 35, 81;
Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 51). He was, perhaps,
fifteen years older than Suetonius, and
seven years older than Pliny.</note>
His life is known to us only from a few stray glimpses in the
Letters of Pliny,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 6, 20; iv. 13; vi. 9,
16, 20; vii. 20, 33; viii. 7; ix. 10,
14.</note> eked out by the inferences of modern
erudition. As a young boy, he must have often heard the
tales of the artistic follies and the orgies of Nero, and the
ghastly cruelties of the end of his reign. As a lad of fifteen, he
may have witnessed something of the carnival of blood and
lust which appropriately closed the régime of the Julio-Claudian
line. He entered on his <hi rend="italic">cursus honorum</hi> in the reign
of Vespasian, and attained the praetorship under Domitian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 1; <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 11. This
latter important passage fixes the date
of his praetorship, 88 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>; cf. Teuffel,
ii. p. 165 n. 6; Peter, ii. 43.</note>
A military command probably withdrew him from Rome for
three years during the tyranny of the last Flavian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi> c. 45.</note> He was
consul suffectus in 97, and then held the proconsulship of Asia.
It cannot be doubted from his own words that, as a senator,
he had to witness tamely the Curia beset with soldiery, the
noblest women driven into exile, and men of the highest rank
and virtue condemned to death on venal testimony in the secret
tribunal of the Alban Palace. His hand helped to drag
Helvidius to the dungeon, and was stained with the blood of
Senecio. He lived long enough under a better prince to
leave an unfading picture of the tragedy of solitary and
remorseless power, but not long enough to forget the horrors
and degradation through which he had passed.
</p>

<p>
The claim of Tacitus to have been uninfluenced by passion
<pb n="23"/><anchor id="Pg23"/>or partiality<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 1, sed incorruptam fidem professis,
neque amore quisquam et sine odio
dicendus est; Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi> xxvi.</note> has been disputed by a modern school of critics.<note place="foot">Merivale, viii. 84, Schiller, <hi rend="italic">Gesch.
der Röm. Kaiserzeit</hi>, i. 140, 586. According
to Schiller, Tacitus has no research,
no exactness of military or
geographical knowledge, no true conception
of the time. He is an embittered
aristocrat and rhetorician. For a sounder
estimate <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Peter, ii. 43, 60, 63; Nipperdey,
<hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi> xxv. For the influence
on the work of Suetonius of the Senatorial
tradition, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 84;
Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 69.</note>
Sometimes, from a love of Caesarism and strong government,
sometimes from the scholarly weakness for finding a new
interpretation of history, the great historic painter of the
Julio-Claudian despotism has been represented as an acrid
rhetorician of the Senatorial reaction, a dreamer who looks
back wistfully to the old Republic, belonging to one of those
haughty circles of the old régime which were always in chronic
revolt, which lived in an atmosphere of suspicion and poisonous
gossip, and nourished its dreams and hatreds till fiction
and fact melted into one another in gloomy retrospect.<note place="foot">Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 66.</note> He
is the great literary avenger of the Senate after its long
sanguinary conflict with the principate, using the freedom of
the new order to blacken the character of princes who had
been forced, in the interests of the world-wide empire, to fight
and to crush a selfish and narrow-minded caste.<note place="foot">Merivale, viii. 95 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The weakness of all such estimates of Tacitus lies in their
failure to recognise the complex nature of the man, the
mingled and crossing influences of training, official experience,
social environment, and lofty moral ideals<note place="foot">Peter, ii. 46 sqq.</note>; it lies even more
in a misconception of his aims as a historian. Tacitus was a
great orator, and the spirit of the rhetorical school, combined
with the force and dexterity of style which it could communicate,
left the greatest Roman historians with a less
rigorous sense of truth than their weakest modern successors
often possess.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 188, 200.</note> No Roman ever rose to the Thucydidean
conception of history. Moreover Tacitus, although originally
not of the highest social rank,<note place="foot">His father was probably a Roman
Eques, procurator in Belgium; Plin.
<hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> vii. 16, 76.</note> belonged to the aristocratic
class by sympathy and associations. Like Suetonius, he
necessarily drew much of his information from the memories
of great houses and the tales of the elders who had lived
through the evil days.<note place="foot">Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 83, Peter, ii. 69
sqq.</note> He acquired thus many of the
<pb n="24"/><anchor id="Pg24"/>prejudices of a class which, from its history, and still more
from its education, sought its ideals in the past rather than
in the future. He mingled in those circles, which in every
age disguise the meanness and bitterness of gossip by the
airy artistic touch of audacious wit, polished in many social
encounters. He had himself witnessed the triumph of delation
and the cold cruelty of Domitian. He had shared in
the humiliation of the Senate which had been cowed into
acquiescence in his worst excesses. And the spectacle had
inspired him with a horror of unchecked power in the hands
of a bad man, and a gloomy distrust of that human nature
which could sink to such ignoble servility.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 7; xv. 71; <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 45;
Peter, ii. 62.</note> Yet on the
other hand Tacitus had gained practical experience in high
office, both as soldier and administrator, which has always a
sobering effect on the judgment. He realised the difficulties
of government and the unreasonableness of ordinary men.
Hence he has no sympathy with a doctrinaire and chimerical
opposition even under the worst government.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 12, 57; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 6;
<hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 42; Peter, ii. 47.</note> However much
he might respect the high character of the philosophic
enthusiasts of the day, he distrusted their theatrical defiance
of power, and he threw his shield over a discreet reserve,
which could forget that it was serving a tyrant in serving
the commonwealth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 42.</note> Tacitus may at times express himself
with a stern melancholy bitterness, which might at first
seem to mark him as a revolutionary dreamer, avenging an
outraged political ideal. Such an interpretation would be a
grave mistake, which he would himself have been the first to
correct. The ideal which he is avenging is not a political,
but a moral ideal.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 65, praecipuum munus
annalium reor, ne virtutes sileantur,
utque pravis dictis factisque ex posteritate
et infamia metus sit; cf. Peter,
ii. 46; Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi> xxvi.</note> The bitter sadness is that of the profound
analyst of character, with a temperament of almost feverish
intensity and nervous force. The interest of history to
Thucydides and Polybius lies in the political lessons which
it may teach posterity. Its interest to Tacitus lies in the
discovery of hidden motives and the secret of character, in
watching the stages of an inevitable degeneracy, the moral
preparation for a dark, inglorious end. And the analyst
<pb n="25"/><anchor id="Pg25"/>was a curiously vivid painter of character, the character of
individuals, of periods, and of peoples. His portraits burn
themselves into the imaginative memory, so that the impression,
once seized, can never be lost. Tiberius and Claudius
and Nero, Messalina and Agrippina, in spite of the most
mordant criticism, will live for ever as they have been
portrayed by the fervid imagination of Tacitus. Nor is he
less searching and vivid in depicting the collective feeling
and character of masses of men. We watch the alternating
fury and repentance of the mutinous legions of Germanicus,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 39, 41.</note>
or the mingled fierceness and sorrow with which they
wandered among the bleaching bones on the lost battlefield
of Varus,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 61, 62.</note> or the passion of grief and admiration with which
the praetorian cohorts kissed the self-inflicted wounds of
Otho.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 49.</note> Or, again, we follow the changing moods of the
Roman populace, passing from anger and grief to short-lived
joy, and then to deep silent sorrow, at the varying rumours
from the East about the health of Germanicus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 82.</note> In Tacitus
events are nearly always seen in their moral setting. The
misery and shame of the burning of the Capitol by the
Vitellians are heightened by the thought that the catastrophe
is caused by the madness of civil strife.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 72.</note> In the awful
conflict which raged from street to street, the horror consists
in the mixture of cruelty and licence. The baths and
brothels and taverns are crowded at the very hour when the
neighbouring ways are piled with corpses and running with
blood; the rush of indulgence paused not for a moment; men
seemed to revel in the public disasters. There was bloodshed
enough in the days of Cinna and Sulla, but the world
was at least spared such a carnival of lust.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 83.</note> Even in
reporting or imagining the speech of Galgacus to his warriors
on the Grampians,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 32.</note> even in the pictures of the German
tribes,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 17, 19, 20, 23, 25.</note> the ethical interest is always foremost. The cruel
terror of the prince, the effeminacy and abandoned adulation
of the nobles, the grossness and fierceness of the masses,
contrasted with the loyalty, chastity, and hardihood of the
German clans, seem to have dimly foreshadowed to Tacitus
<pb n="26"/><anchor id="Pg26"/>a danger from which all true Romans averted their eyes till
the end.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 33, <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The key to the interpretation of Tacitus is to regard him
as a moralist rather than a politician. And he is a moralist
with a sad, clinging pessimism.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 3; ii. 38; iii. 72; Peter,
ii. 62. Yet this should be qualified by
such passages as <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55; <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> i.;
cf. Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi> xxvii.</note> He is doomed to be the
chronicler of an evil time, although he will save from oblivion
the traces and relics of ancient virtue.<note place="foot"> <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 65.</note> He has Seneca’s
pessimist theory of evolution. The early equality and peace and
temperance have been lost through a steady growth of greed
and egotistic ambition.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 26.</note> It is in the past we must seek our
ideals; it is from the past we derive our strength. With
the same gloomy view of his contemporaries as M. Aurelius
had,<note place="foot">M. Aurel. ix. 29, 34; x. 19.</note> he holds vaguely a similar view of cycles in human
affairs.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55; M. Aurel. vii.
1; ix. 4; x. 23; ix. 28.</note> And probably the fairest hope which ever visited the
mind of Tacitus was that of a return to the simplicity of a long
gone age. He hailed the accession of Vespasian and of Trajan
as a happy change to purer manners and to freedom of speech.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 3.</note>
But the reign of Vespasian had been followed by the gloomy
suspicious despotism of Domitian. Who could be sure about
the successors of Trajan? Tacitus hardly shared the enthusiasm
and exuberant hopes expressed by his friend Pliny in his
<hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi>. It was a natural outbreak of joy at escaping from
the dungeon, and the personal character of Trajan succeeded
in partially veiling the overwhelming force of the emperor
under the figment of the freely accepted rule of the first citizen.
Tacitus no doubt felt as great satisfaction as his friend at the
suppression of the informers, the restored freedom of speech,
the recovered dignity of the Senate, the prince’s respect for old
republican forms and etiquette.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 35, 53, 54, 66; cf.
Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 1.</note> He felt probably even keener
pleasure that virtue and talent had no longer to hide themselves
from a jealous eye, and that the whole tone of society
was being raised by the temperate example of the emperor.
But he did not share Pliny’s illusions as to the prince’s altered
position under the new régime. The old Republic was gone
for ever.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 1, omnem potentiam ad
unum conferri pacis interfuit; cf. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi>
i. 16; ii. 38.</note> It was still the rule of one man, on whose character
<pb n="27"/><anchor id="Pg27"/>everything depended. He would never have joined Plutarch
and Dion in exalting the emperor to the rank of vicegerent
of God. With his experience and psychologic skill, he
was bound to regard all solitary power as a terrible danger
both to its holder and his subjects.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 47; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 8, bonos
imperatores voto expetere, qualescumque
tolerare.</note> <q>Capax imperii, nisi
imperasset</q> condenses a whole disquisition on imperialism.
In truth, Tacitus, like many thoughtful students of politics,
had little faith in mere political forms and names.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 46; vi. 42; iv. 33; iii.
27; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 38.</note> They are
often the merest imposture: they depend greatly on the spirit
and social tone which lie behind them. In the abstract,
perhaps, Tacitus would have given a preference to aristocracy.
But he saw how easily it might pass into a selfish despotism.<note place="foot">Peter, ii. 53; <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> vi. 42.</note>
He had no faith in the people or in popular government, with
its unstable excitability. He admitted that the conquests of
Rome, egotistic ambition, and the long anarchy of the Civil
Wars had made the rule of one inevitable. But monarchy
easily glides into tyranny, and he accepts the Empire only as a
perilous necessity which may be justified by the advent of a
good prince. The hereditary succession, which had been grafted
on the principate of Augustus, had inflicted on the world a
succession of fools or monsters. The only hope lay in elevating
the standard of virtue, and in the choice of a worthy successor
by the forms of adoption.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 16; Peter, ii. 61.</note> The one had in his own time given
the world a Domitian, and was destined within three generations
to give it a Commodus. The other secured to it the peace and
order of the age of which Tacitus saw the dawn.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> i.</note>
</p>

<p>
The motive of Tacitus was essentially ethical, and his moral
standard was in many respects lofty. Yet his standard was
sometimes limited by the prejudices of his class. He cherished
the old Roman ideal of <q>virtus</q> rather than the Stoic gospel
of a cosmopolitan brotherhood of man.<note place="foot">Peter, ii. 48.</note> Like Pliny, he felt
little horror at gladiatorial combats,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 76; quanquam <hi rend="italic">vili</hi>
sanguine nimis gaudens. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Dial. de
Or.</hi> 29; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 34, 1.</note> although he may have had
a certain contempt for the rage for them. He had probably
far less humane feelings than Pliny on the subject of slavery.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 43; <hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 20.</note>
<pb n="28"/><anchor id="Pg28"/>While he admired many of the rude virtues of the Germans,
he prayed Heaven that their tribal blood-feuds might last for
ever.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 33. Cf. his contempt for
the Christians and devotees of Eastern
cults, <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 85; xv. 44.</note> He has all the faith of Theognis in the moral value of
blood and breeding. He feels a proud satisfaction in recording
the virtues of the scion of a noble race, and degeneracy from
great traditions moves his indignant pity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 53; iv. 3; iii. 39: vi. 29;
xii. 12; iii. 24; xvi. 16. Cf. Peter,
ii. 51.</note> He sometimes
throws a veil over the degenerates.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 14.</note> The great economic
revolution which was raising the freedman, the petty trader,
the obscure provincial, to the top, he probably regarded with
something of Juvenal’s suspicion and dislike. The new man
would have needed a fine character, or a great record of service,
to commend him to Tacitus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 21; vi. 27; iv. 3.</note> But, with all these defects of
hard and narrow prejudice, Tacitus maintains a lofty ideal of
character, a severe enthusiasm for the great virtues which are
the salt of every society.
</p>

<p>
Of the early nurture of Tacitus nothing is directly known.
But we may be permitted to imagine him tenderly yet strictly
guarded from the taint of slave nurses<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> 29.</note> by a mother who was
as unspotted as Julia Procilla, the mother of his hero Agricola.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 4.</note>
What importance he attached to this jealous care of a good
woman, what a horror he had of the incitements to cruelty
and lust which surrounded the young Roman from his cradle,
are to be traced in many a passage coming from the heart. His
ideal of youthful chastity and of the pure harmony of a single
wedded union, reveals to us another world from the scene of
heartless, vagrant intrigue, on which Ovid wasted his brilliant
gifts. His taste, if not his principles, revolted against the coarse
seductions of the spectacles and the wasteful grossness of the
banquets of his time.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 19, saepta pudicitia agunt,
nullis spectaculorum inlecebris ... corruptae;
<hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> 29.</note> He envies the Germans their freedom
from these great corrupters of Roman character, from the lust
for gold, and the calculating sterility which cut itself from
nature’s purest pleasure, to be surrounded on the deathbed by a
crowd of hungry, shameless sycophants. While Tacitus had a
burning contempt for the nerveless cowardice and sluggishness
which degraded so many of his order,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 37; <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 7; xv. 57, 71.</note> he may have valued
<pb n="29"/><anchor id="Pg29"/>even to excess, although it is hardly possible to do so, the
virtues of the strenuous soldier. Proud submission to authority,
proud, cold endurance in the face of cruel hardship and
enormous odds, readiness to sacrifice even life at the call of
the State, must always tower over the safe aspirations of
an untried virtue. The soldier, though he never knows it,
is the noblest of idealists. The ideal of Tacitus, although he
sees his faults of temper,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 22.</note> was probably the character of his
father-in-law, Agricola, grave, earnest and severe, yet with a
mingled clemency, free from all vulgar avarice or ostentation
of rank, from all poisonous jealousy, an eager ambitious warrior,
yet one knowing well how to temper audacious energy with
prudence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 40.</note> Tacitus would probably have sought his ideal
among those grey war-worn soldiers on a dangerous frontier,
half warrior and half statesman, just and clement, stern in
discipline, yet possessing the secret of the Roman soldier’s love,
the men who were guarding the Solway, the Rhine, and the
Danube, while their brethren in the Senate were purchasing
their lives or their ease by adulation and treachery. Yet, after
all, Tacitus was too great for such a limited ideal. He could
admire faith and courage and constancy in any rank.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 60.</note> With
profound admiration and subdued pathos, he tells how the
freedwoman Epicharis, racked and fainting in every limb with
the extremity of torture, refused to tell the secret of the
Pisonian conspiracy, and by a voluntary death shamed the
knights and nobles who were ready to betray their nearest
kin.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 57.</note> The slave girls of the empress, who defiantly upheld
her fair fame, under the last cruel ordeal, are honoured by a
like memorial.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
The deepest feeling of Tacitus about the early Empire
seems to have been that it was fatal to character both in
prince and subject. This conviction he has expressed with the
burning intensity of the artist. He could never have penned
one of those laborious paragraphs of Suetonius which seem
transcribed from a carefully kept note-book, with a lifeless
catalogue of the vices, the virtues, and the eccentricities of the
subject. For Tacitus, history is a living and real thing, not a
matter of mere antiquarian interest. He has seen a single
<pb n="30"/><anchor id="Pg30"/>lawless will, unchecked by constitutional restraints or ordinary
human feeling, making sport of the lives and fortunes of men.
He has seen the sons of the proudest houses selling their
ancestral honour for their lives, betraying their nearest and
dearest, and kissing the hand which was reeking with innocent
blood.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 71.</note> When he looked back, he saw that, for more than
fifteen years, with brief intervals, virtue had been exiled or
compelled to hide itself in impotent seclusion, and that power
and wealth had been the reward of perfidy and grovelling self-abasement.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 2.</note>
The brooding silence of those years of humiliating
servitude did not extinguish the faith of Tacitus in human
virtue, but it almost extinguished his faith in a righteous God.
Tacitus is no philosopher, with either a reasoned théodicée or a
consistent repudiation of faith.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 4, memoria teneo solitum
ipsum narrare se studium philosophiae
acrius, ultra quam concessum Romano
ac Senatori, exhausisse. Cf. Fabian,
<hi rend="italic">Quid Tac. de num. Div. judicaverit</hi>,
p. 1.</note> He uses popular language
about religion, and often speaks like an old Roman in all things
touching the gods.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> v. 5; Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi> xiv.</note> He is, moreover, often as credulous as
he is sceptical in his treatment of omens and oracles.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 22; ii. 78; i. 86. But cf.
<hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 43, 64; xiv. 32; xv. 8;
<hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 3; ii. 50; and Fabian, pp. <anchor id="corr30"/><corr sic="17">17,</corr>
19.</note> But,
with all his intense faith in goodness, the spectacle of the world
of the Caesars has profoundly shaken his trust in the Divine
justice. Again and again, he attributes the long agony of the
Roman world to mere chance or fate,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 20; cf. vi. 22.</note> or the anger of Heaven,
as well as to the madness of men.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 38.</note> Sometimes he almost
denies a ruling power which could permit the continuance of
the crimes of a Nero.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 12; Fabian, p. 23.</note> Sometimes he grimly notes its impartial
treatment of the good and the evil.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 33, aequitate deum erga
bona malaque documenta.</note> And again, he speaks of
the Powers who visit not to protect, but only to avenge. And
so, by a curse like that which haunted the Pelopidae in tragic
legend, the monarchy, cradled in ambition and civil strife, has
gone on corrupting and corrupted. The lust of despotic power
which Tacitus regards as the fiercest and most insatiable of
human passions, has been intensified by the spectacle of a
monarchy commanding, with practically unlimited sway, the
resources and the fortunes of a world.</p>

<pb n="31"/><anchor id="Pg31"/>

<p>
It was a dazzling prize, offering frightful temptations both
to the holder and to possible rivals and pretenders. The day
on which a Nero or a Caligula awoke to all the possibilities of
power was a fateful one. And Tacitus, with the instinct of
the tragic artist, has painted the steady, fatal corruption of
a prince’s character by the corroding influence of absolute and
solitary sway. Of all the Caesars down to his time, the
only one who changed for the better was the homely Vespasian.
In Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, some of this deterioration of
character must be set down to the morbid strain in the Julio-Claudian
line, with its hard and cruel pride, and its heritage
of a tainted blood, of which Nero’s father knew the secret so
well. Much was also due to the financial exhaustion which,
in successive reigns, followed the most reckless waste. It
would be difficult to say whether the emperors or their nobles
were the most to blame for the example of spendthrift extravagance
and insane luxury. Two generations before the foundation
of the Empire, the passion for profusion had set in, which,
according to Tacitus, raged unchecked till the accession of
Vespasian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55; cf. xvi. 5.</note> Certainly, the man who would spend £3000 on
a myrrhine vase, £4000 on a table of citrus-wood, or £40,000
on a richly wrought carpet from Babylon, had little to learn
even from Nero.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. pp. 80, 81.</note> Yet the example of an emperor must always
be potent for good or evil. We have the testimony of Pliny
and Claudian,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 45; Claudian, <hi rend="italic">In
Cons. Hon.</hi> 299, componitur orbis Regis
ad exemplum.</note> separated by an interval of three hundred years,
that the world readily conforms its life to that of one man,
if that man is head of the State. Nero’s youthful enthusiasm
for declamation gave an immense impulse to the passion for
rhetoric.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">De Clar. Rhet.</hi> c. 1.</note> His enthusiasm for acting and music spread through
all ranks, and the emperor’s catches were sung at wayside
inns.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, 21; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
Tyan.</hi> iv. 39.</note> M. Aurelius made philosophy the mode, and the Stoic
Emperor is responsible for some of the philosophic imposture
which moved the withering scorn of Lucian. The Emperor’s
favourite drug grew so popular that the price of it became
almost prohibitory.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 54.</note> If the model of Vespasian’s homely habits
had such an effect in reforming society, we may be sure that
<pb n="32"/><anchor id="Pg32"/>the evil example of his spendthrift predecessors did at least
as much to deprave it.
</p>

<p>
And what an example it was! The extravagance of the
Claudian Caesars and the last Flavian has become a piece of
historic commonplace. Every one has heard of the unguent
baths of Caligula, his draughts of melted pearls, his galleys
with jewel-studded sterns and gardens and orchards on their
decks, his viaduct connecting the Palatine with the Capitoline,
his bridge from Bauli to Puteoli, and many another scheme
of that wild brain, which had in the end to be paid for in
blood.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 37; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> x.</note> In a single year Caligula scattered in reckless waste
more than £20,000,000.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 37.</note> Nero proclaimed that the only use
of money was to squander it, and treated any prudent calculation
as meanness.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. 30.</note> In a brief space he flung away nearly
£18,000,000. The Egyptian roses for a single banquet cost
£35,000.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 27.</note> He is said never to have made a progress with less
than a thousand carriages; his mules were shod with silver.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 30.</note>
He would stake HS.400,000 on a single throw of the dice.
The description of his Golden House is like a vision of lawless
romance.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 31; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 42.</note> The successors of Galba were equally lavish
during their brief term. Otho, another Nero, probably regarded
death in battle as a relief from bankruptcy.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, 5, nihilque referre, ab
hoste in acie, an in foro sub creditoribus
caderet.</note> Within a very
few months, Vitellius had flung away more than £7,000,000
in vulgar luxury.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> c. 13.</note> Vespasian found the exhaustion of the
public treasury so portentous<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> 16; D. Cass. 66. 2, 8, 10.</note> that he had to resort to unpopular
economies and taxation on a great scale. Under
Domitian, the spectacles and largesses lavished on the mob
undid all the scrupulous finance of his father,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 67. 5; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> 12.</note> and Nerva had
to liquidate the ruinous heritage by wholesale retrenchment,
and the sale even of the imperial furniture and plate,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 68. 2,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">συστέλλων ὡς οἷόν τε τὰ δαπανήματα</foreign>.</note> as M.
Aurelius brought to the hammer his household treasures, and
even the wardrobe and jewels of the empress, in the stress of
the Marcomannic war.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Aurel.</hi> c. 17, in foro
divi Trajani auctionem ornamentorum
imperialium fecit vendiditque aurea
pocula et cristallina, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the great imperial spendthrifts resorted to more
<pb n="33"/><anchor id="Pg33"/>simple and primitive methods of replenishing their coffers.
Self-indulgent waste is often seen linked with meanness
and hard cruelty. The epigram of Suetonius on Domitian,
<hi rend="italic">inopia rapax, metu saevus</hi>,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> iii.</note> sums up the sordid history of
the tyranny. The cool biographer of Caligula, Nero, and
Domitian, when in his methodical fashion, he has recorded
their financial difficulties, immediately proceeds to describe
the unblushing rapine or ingenious chicanery by which the
needy tyrants annexed a coveted estate. The emperors now
generally protected the provinces from plunder,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, iii.; <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> v.; <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi>
viii.; <anchor id="corr33"/><corr sic="Bossier">Boissier</corr>, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 170.</note> but they
applied all the Verrine methods to their own nobles. It was
not hard with the help of the sleuth hounds who always
gather round the despot, to find plausible grounds of accusation.
The vague law of majesty, originally intended to guard
the security of the commonwealth, was now used to throw its
protection around the sacrosanct prince in whom all the highest
powers of government were concentrated.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 72; ii. 50; xiv. 48.
For a clear account of this <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Boissier,
<hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 165.</note> The slightest suspicion
of disloyalty or discontent, the most insignificant act
or word, which a depraved ingenuity could misinterpret, was
worked up into a formidable indictment by men eager for
their share of the plunder. To have written the memoir of a
Stoic saint or kept the birthday of a dead emperor, to possess
an imperial horoscope or a map of the world, to call a slave
by the name of Hannibal or a dish by that of Lucullus, might
become a fatal charge.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x.; cf. xii. satis erat obici
qualecunque factum dictumve adversus
majestatem principis.</note> <q>Ungrateful testators</q> who had
failed to remember the emperor in their wills had to pay
heavily for the indiscreet omission.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xii.</note> The materials for such
accusations were easily obtained in the Rome of the early
Caesars. Life was eminently sociable. A great part of the day
was spent at morning receptions, in the Forum, the Campus
Martius, the barber’s or bookseller’s shops, or in the colonnades
where crowds of fashionable idlers gathered to relieve the
tedium of life by gossip and repartee. It was a city, says
Tacitus, which knew everything and talked of everything.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 27; xiii. 6, in urbe
sermonum avida; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 91; Mart.
v. 20; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. p. 280.</note>
Never was curiosity more eager or gossip more reckless. Men
were almost ready to risk their lives for a <hi rend="italic">bon mot</hi>. And in the
<pb n="34"/><anchor id="Pg34"/>reign of Nero or Domitian, the risk was a very real one.
The imperial espionage, of which Maecenas in Dion Cassius
recognised at once the danger and the necessity,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 52. 37.</note> was an
organised system even under the most blameless emperors
It can be traced in the reigns of Nerva, Hadrian, and
Antoninus Pius.<note place="foot">Mart x. 48, 21; cf. Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Chronologie
der Epigr. Mart.</hi> p. 62; Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. p. 285; Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iv.
13, 21, 5; Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> ix. 62.</note> But under the tyrants, voluntary informers
sprang up in every class. Among the hundreds of
slaves attached to a great household, there were in such times
sure to be spies, attracted by the lure of freedom and a
fortune, who might report and distort what they had observed
in their master’s unguarded hours. Men came to dread possible
traitors even among their nearest of kin, among their
closest friends of the highest rank.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 69.</note> Who can forget the
ignominy of those three Senators, one of them bearing the
historic name of Cato, who, to win the consulship from
Sejanus, hid themselves between the ceiling and the roof, and
caught, through chinks and crannies, the words artfully drawn
from the victim by another member of the noble gang? The
seventh book of the <hi rend="italic">Life of Apollonius</hi> by Philostratus is a
revelation of the mingled caution and truculence of the
methods of Domitian. Here at least we have left the world
of romance behind and are on solid ground. We feel around
us, as we read, the hundred eyes of an omnipresent tyranny.
We meet in the prison the magistrate of Tarentum who had
been guilty of a dangerous omission in the public prayers, and
an Acarnanian who had been guilty of settling in one of the
Echinades.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> vii. 24.</note> A spy glides into the cells, to listen to the
prisoners’ talk, and is merely regaled by Apollonius with a
description of the wonders he has seen in his wanderings.
When we are admitted to the secret tribunal on the Palatine,
after Domitian has paid his devotion to Athene, we have before
us a cruel, stealthy despot, as timid as he is brutally truculent.
In spite of all scepticism about Philostratus, we are
there at the heart of the Terror.
</p>

<p>
Compared with this base espionage, even the trade of the
delator becomes almost respectable. Like everything in
Roman social organisation, delation had a long history, too
<pb n="35"/><anchor id="Pg35"/>long to be developed within the space of this work. The
work of impeachment, which might be wholesome and
necessary under the Republic, in exposing the enormities of
provincial government, became the curse of the Empire. The
laws of Augustus for the restoration of social morality gave
the first chance to the professional delator. The jealous,
secretive rule of Tiberius welcomed such sinister support,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 72, 74, Crispinus formam
vitae iniit quam postea celebrem
miseriae temporum et audaciae hominum
fecerunt, etc.; cf. iii. 25; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 26; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> lxi.</note>
and although the dark, tortuous policy of the recluse of
Capreae might punish the excess of zeal in the informers, it
was also ready to reward them for opportune displays of
energy.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 20.</note> The open and daring tyranny of Caligula and Nero
often dispensed with the hypocrisy of judicial forms of
assassination. It was reserved for the last Flavian to revive
the methods of Tiberius.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xx. praeter commentarios
et acta Tiberii nihil lectitabat;
Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 42, 48.</note> Domitian was at once timid and
cruel. He was also a pedant who concealed from himself his
own baseness by a scrupulous devotion to ancient forms even
in religion. The obscene libertine, who chose the Virgin Goddess
as his patroness,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xv.</note> could easily make the forms of old Roman
justice a cloak for confiscation and massacre. In theory the
voluntary accuser, without a commission from authority, was
a discredited person. And successive emperors punished or
frowned upon the delators of a previous reign.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 10; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 35;
D. Cass. 68. 1; Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi>
c. 7; id. <hi rend="italic">M. Aurel.</hi> c. 11; Meriv. vii.
370.</note> Yet the
profession grew in reputation and emolument. It is a
melancholy proof of the degradation of that society that the
delator could be proud of his craft and even envied and
admired. Men of every degree, freedmen, schoolmasters,
petty traders, descendants of houses as old as the Republic,
men from the rank of the shoemaker Vatinius<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 34; iii. 66; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi>
iv. 42.</note> to a Scaurus,
a Cato, or a Regulus, flocked to a trade which might earn a
fabulous fortune and the favour of the prince. There must
have been many a career like that of Palfurius Sura, who had
fought in the arena in the reign of Nero, who had been
disgraced and stripped of his consular rank under Vespasian,
who then turned Stoic and preached the gospel of popular
<pb n="36"/><anchor id="Pg36"/>government, and, in the reign of Domitian, crowned his career
by becoming a delator, and attempting to found a juristic
theory of absolute monarchy.<note place="foot">Schol. ad Juv. iv. 53; Duruy, iv.
660.</note>
</p>

<p>
The system of Roman education, which was profoundly
rhetorical, became a hot-bed of this venal oratory. It nourished
its pupils on the masterpieces of free speech; it inflamed their
imaginations with dreams of rhetorical triumph. When they
went forth into the world of the Empire, they found the only
arena for displaying their powers to be the dull court of the
Centumviri, or the hired lecture hall, where they might dilate
on some frigid or silly theme before a weary audience. It was
a tempting excitement to exert the arts learnt in the school of
Quintilian in a real onslaught, where the life or liberty of the
accused was at stake. And the greatest orators of the past
had never offered to them such a splendid material reward.
One fourth of the estate of the condemned man had been the
old legal fee of the accuser.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 20.</note> But this limit was left far
behind in the judicial plunder of the early Caesars. Probably
in no other way could a man then so easily make himself a
millionaire. The leading accusers of Thrasea and Soranus in
the reign of Nero received each £42,000 as their reward.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvi. 33; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 186.</note>
These notorious delators, Eprius Marcellus and Vibius Crispus,
accumulated gains reaching, in the end, the enormous amount
of £2,400,000. The famous, or infamous, Regulus, after the
most prodigal expenditure, left a fortune of half a million.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 20, 13; iv. 2; cf. Tac.
<hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 42; Mart. vii. 31.</note>
His career is a striking example of the arts by which, in
a debased society, men may rise to fortune, and the readiness
with which such a society will always forgive anything
to daring and success. Sprung from an illustrious but
ruined race,<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 193.</note> Regulus possessed shameless audacity and
ruthless ambition,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 11, 22.</note> which were more valuable than birth and
fortune. He had every physical defect for a speaker, yet he
made himself an orator, with a weird power of strangling his
victims.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 7; i. 20, 15.</note> He was poor, but he resolved to be wealthy, and he
reached the fortune which he proposed to himself as his goal.
He was vain, cruel, and insolent, a slave of superstition,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 11, 22; ii. 20.</note>
<pb n="37"/><anchor id="Pg37"/>stained with many a perfidious crime. He was a peculiarly
skilful and perfectly shameless adept in the arts of captation.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 20, 2.</note>
Yet this cynical agent of judicial murder, who began his
career in the reign of Nero, lived on in peace and wealth into
the reign of Trajan. He even enjoyed a certain consideration
in society.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 7.</note> The humane and refined Pliny at once detested and
tolerated him. The morning receptions of Regulus, in his distant
gardens on the Tiber, were thronged by a fashionable crowd.
</p>

<p>
The inner secret of the imperial Terror will probably
always perplex the historian. The solution of the question
depends, not only on the value which is to be attached to our
authorities, but on the prepossessions and prejudices which are
brought to their interpretation. To one critic Tacitus, although
liable to the faults which spring from rhetorical training and
fervid temperament, seems fairly impartial and trustworthy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">E.g.</hi> Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 296; Peter,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. p. 65: Teuffel, § 328,
15; Mackail, <hi rend="italic">Lat. Lit.</hi> p. 215.</note>
Another treats the great historian as essentially a partisan who
derived his materials from the memoirs and traditions of a class
inflamed with reactionary dreams and saturated with a hatred
of monarchy.<note place="foot">Schiller, i. pp. 140, 586; Meriv.
viii. 89 sqq.</note> Some regard the tragedy of the early Empire as
the result of a real peril from a senatorial conspiracy which
perpetually surrounded the emperor. Others trace it to the
diseased brains of princes, giddy with the sense of omnipotence,
and often unstrung by vicious excesses, natures at once timorous
and arrogant, anticipating danger by a maniacal cruelty
which ended in creating the peril that they feared. Is it not
possible that there may be truth in both theories? It
may be admitted that there probably was never a powerful
opposition, with a definitely conceived purpose of overthrowing
the imperial system, as it had been organised by Augustus, and
of restoring the republican rule of the Senate. It may be
admitted that, while so many of the first twelve Caesars died a
violent death, the violence was used to rid the world of a
monster, and not to remodel a constitution; it was the
emperor, not the Empire, that was hated. Yet these admissions
need to be qualified by some reservations. The effect
of the rhetorical character of Roman education in moulding the
temper and ideals of the upper classes, down to the very end
<pb n="38"/><anchor id="Pg38"/>of the Western Empire, has hardly yet been fully recognised.
It petrified literature by the slavish imitation of unapproachable
models. It also glorified the great ages of freedom and
republican government; it exalted Harmodius and Aristogeiton,
Brutus and Cassius, to a moral height which might
suggest to generous youth the duty or the glory of imitating
them. When a rhetor’s class, in the reign of Caligula or of
Nero, applauded the fall of a historic despot, is it not possible
that some may have applied the lesson to the reigning emperor?
Although it is evident that philosophic debates on the three
forms of government were not unknown, yet probably few ever
seriously thought of a restoration of the republic. None but a
maniac would have entrusted the nerveless, sensual mob of
Rome with the destinies of the world. As a matter of fact,
the mob themselves very much preferred the rule of a lavish
despot, who would cater for their pleasures.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> x.; <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> lx.; D.
Cass. 60. 1. On the assassination of
Caligula, the Senate debated the question
of abolishing the memory of the
Caesars, and restoring the Republic;
but the mob outside the temple of the
Capitoline Jupiter demanded <q>one
ruler</q> of the world.</note> But the Senate
was still a name of power. In the three or four generations
which had passed since the death of the first Caesar, men had
forgotten the weakness and perfidy which had made senatorial
government impossible. They thought of the Senate as the
stubborn, haughty caste which had foiled the strategy of Hannibal,
which had achieved the conquest of the world. The
old families might have been more than decimated; new men
of doubtful origin might have filled their places.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 25; xiii. 27.</note> But ancient
institutions possess a prestige and power which is often independent
of the men who work them. Men are governed largely
through imagination and mere names. Thus the Senate remained
an imaginative symbol of the glory of Roman power,
down to the last years of the Western Empire. The accomplished
Symmachus cherishes the phantasm of its power under
Honorius. And although a Caligula or Nero might conceive a
feverish hatred of the assembly which they feared,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxx.; xxvi.; <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>,
xxxvii. eumque ordinem sublaturum
quandoque e republica...; cf. xliii.
creditur destinasse senatum universum
veneno per convivia necare....
D. Cass. 63. 15, 17.</note> while they
affected to despise it, the better emperors generally made almost
a parade of their respect for the Senate.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 54, 62, 64; Spart.
<hi rend="italic">Hadrian</hi>, 6, 7, § 4; 8, § 6.</note> The wisest princes had
<pb n="39"/><anchor id="Pg39"/>a feeling that, although they might have at their back the devotion
of the legions, and an immense material force, still it was
wiser to conciliate old Roman feeling by a politic deference to a
body which was surrounded by the aureole of antiquity, which
had such splendid traditions of conquest and administration.
</p>

<p>
The Senate was thus the only possible rival of the Emperor.
The question is, was the Senate ever a dangerous rival?
The true answer seems to be that the Senate was dangerous
in theory, but not in fact. There can be little doubt that, in
the reigns of Caligula and Nero, there were men who dreamed
of a restored senatorial power.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> x.</note> It is equally certain that the
Senate was incapable of asserting it. Luxury, self-indulgence,
and conscription had done their work effectually. There were
many pretenders to the principate in the reign of Nero, and
even some in the reign of Vespasian.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 16; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xxv.</note> But they had not a
solid and determined Senate at their back. The world, and
even the Senate, were convinced that the Roman Empire
needed the administration of one man. How to get the one
man was the problem. Hereditary succession had placed only
fools or monsters on the throne. There remained the old principle
of adoption. An emperor, feeling that his end was
approaching, might, with all his vast experience of the government
of a world, with all his knowledge of the senatorial class,
with no fear of offence in the presence of death,<note place="foot">See the speech of the dying Hadrian
to the Senators, D. Cass. 69. 20.</note> designate one
worthy of the enormous charge. If such an one came to the
principate, with a generous desire to give the Senate a share of
his burdens and his glory, that was the highest ideal of the
Empire, and that was the ideal which perhaps was approached in
the Antonine age. Yet, outside the circle of practical statesmen,
there remained a class which was long irreconcilable. It has
been recently maintained with great force that the Stoic opposition
was only the opposition of a moral ideal, not the deliberate
propaganda of a political creed.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> 102.</note> This may be true of some of
the philosophers: it is certainly not true of all. Thrasea was a
genial man of the world, whose severest censure expressed itself
in silence and absence from the Senate,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 21; xv. 23; xiv. 48,
id <hi rend="italic">egregio</hi> sub principe ... senatui
statuendum disseruit.</note> who could even, on
occasion, speak with deference of Nero. But his son-in-law,
<pb n="40"/><anchor id="Pg40"/>Helvidius Priscus, seemed to exult in flouting and insulting a
great and worthy emperor such as Vespasian.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xv.; cf. xiii., where
Demetrius is guilty of similar rudeness;
D. Cass. 66. 12.</note> And the life
of Apollonius by Philostratus leaves the distinct impression
that philosophy, in the reign of Nero and Domitian, was a
revolutionary force. Apollonius, it is true, is represented by
Philostratus as supporting the cause of monarchy in a debate
in the presence of Vespasian.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> v. 35.</note> But he boasted of having
been privy to conspiracies against Nero,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 3, 4.</note> and he was deeply
involved with Nerva and Orfitus in a plot against Domitian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 8, 33; cf. D. Cass. 67. 18.</note>
He was summoned before the secret tribunal to answer
for speeches against the emperor delivered to crowds at
Ephesus.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> vii. 9.</note> It may be admitted that the invective or scorn
of philosophy was aimed at unworthy princes, rather than at
the foundations of their power. Yet Dion Cassius evidently
regards Helvidius Priscus as a turbulent agitator with dangerous
democratic ideals,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 12,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">βασιλείας τε ἀεὶ κατηγόρει καὶ δημοκρατίαν ἐπῄνει</foreign>.</note> and he contrasts his violence with the
studied moderation, combined with dignified reserve, displayed
by Thrasea in the reign of Nero. The tolerant Vespasian,
who bore so long the wanton insults of the philosophers, must
have come at length to think them not only an offence but a
real danger when he banished them. In the first century
there can be little doubt that there were members of the
philosophic class who condemned monarchy, not only as a moral
danger, but as a lamentable aberration from the traditions of
republican freedom. There were probably some, who, if the
chance had offered itself, might even have ventured on a
republican reaction.
</p>

<p>
With a gloomy recognition of the realities of life,
Domitian used to say that conspiracy against an emperor was
never believed till the emperor was killed.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xxi.</note> Of the first twelve
Caesars seven died a violent death. Every emperor from
Tiberius to M. Aurelius was the mark of conspiracy. This
was often provoked by the detestable character of the prince.
But it sometimes sprang from other causes than moral disgust.
The mild rule of Vespasian was generally popular; yet even he
had to repel the conspiracy of Aelianus and Marcellus.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 16.</note> The
<pb n="41"/><anchor id="Pg41"/>blameless Nerva, the emperor after the Senate’s own heart,
was twice assailed by risings organised by great nobles of
historic name.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 68. 3.</note> The conspiracy of Nigrinus against Hadrian
received formidable support, and had to be sternly crushed.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 7, § 15.</note>
M. Aurelius had to endure with sad resignation the open
rebellion of Avidius Cassius.<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> 24, 25.</note> The better emperors, strong in
their character and the general justice of their administration,
might afford to treat such opposition with comparative calmness.
But it was different in the case of a Nero or a Domitian. The
conspiracy of Piso and the conspiracy of Saturninus formed, in
each case, a climax and a turning-point. Springing from real
and justified impatience, they were ruthlessly crushed and
followed up with a cruel and suspicious repression which only
increased the danger of the despot. <q>Scelera sceleribus
tuenda</q> sums up the awful tale, in the words of Tacitus, <q>of
the wrath of God and the madness of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
There were many causes which rendered the tragedy of the
early Empire inevitable. Probably the most potent was the
undefined position of the prince and the dreams of republican
power and freedom which for ages were cherished by the
Senate. Carefully disguised under ancient forms, the principate
of Augustus was really omnipotent, through the possession of the
proconsular imperium in the provinces, and the tribunician prerogative
at home.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Staatsr.</hi> ii. 787-821;
Professor Pelham has given a luminous
account of the Principate in <hi rend="italic">Encycl.
Brit.</hi> vol. xx. p. 769.</note> In the last resort there was no legal means
of challenging the man who controlled the legions, nominated
the magistrates, and manipulated a vast treasury at his pleasure.
The fiction of Augustus, that he had restored the Republic to
the hands of the Senate and people, is unlikely to have deceived
his own astute intellect.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xxviii.</note> The hand which, of its grace
could restore the <hi rend="italic">simulacra libertatis</hi>, might as easily withdraw
them. The Comitia lost even the shadow of constitutional
power in the following reign.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 15.</note> Henceforth the people is the
army.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> x.; D. Cass. 60. 1;
where the soldiers plainly close the
impotent debates in the Senate, and by
hailing Claudius as emperor.</note> The holders of the great republican magistracies are
mere creatures of the prince and obedient ministers of his
power. The Senate alone retained some vestiges of its old
<pb n="42"/><anchor id="Pg42"/>power, and still larger pretensions and antiquarian claims. In
theory, during a vacancy in the principate, the Senate was the
ultimate seat of authority, and the new emperor received his
prerogatives by a decree of the Senate. In the work of legislation,
its decisions divided the field with the edicts of the
prince,<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Röm. Staatsr.</hi> ii. 839.</note> and it claimed a parallel judicial power. But all this
was really illusory. The working of such a system manifestly
depends on the character and ideas of the man who for the time
wields the material force of the Empire. And <q>the share of
the Senate in the government was in fact determined by the
amount of administrative activity which each emperor saw
fit to allow it to exercise.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Pelham, <hi rend="italic">Encycl. Brit.</hi> xx. p. 779.</note>
</p>

<p>
The half-insane Caligula had really a clearer vision of the
emperor’s position than the reactionary dreamers, when he told
his grandmother Antonia, <q><hi rend="italic">Memento omnia mihi in omnes licere</hi>.</q><note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxix.</note>
He did not need the lessons of Agrippa and Antiochus to teach
him the secret of tyranny.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 59. 24.</note> Yet institutions can never be
separated from the moral and social forces which lie behind
and around them. The emperor had to depend on agents and
advisers, many of them of social rank and family traditions
equal to his own. He had by his side a Senate with a history
of immemorial antiquity and glory, which cast a spell on the
conservative imagination of a race which recoiled from any
impiety to the past. Above all, he was surrounded by a
populace which took its revenge for the loss of its free Comitia
by a surprising licence of lampoon and epigram and mordant
gossip and clamorous appeal in the circus and theatre.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 56. 1; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> vi. 13; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiii.; Plut. <hi rend="italic">Galba</hi>, 17.</note> And
even the soldiers, who were the sworn supporters of the prince,
and who often represented better than any other class the tone
of old Roman gravity and manly virtue, could sometimes make
their Imperator feel that there was in reserve a power which
he could not safely defy. Hence it was that, with the changing
character of the prince, the imperial power might pass into a
lawless tyranny, only to be checked by assassination, while again
it might veil its forces under constitutional forms, adopt the
watchwords of the Republic, exalt the Senate to a place beside
the throne, and make even accomplished statesmen fancy for
the time that the days of ancient liberty had returned.
</p>

<pb n="43"/><anchor id="Pg43"/>

<p>
Such a dream, not altogether visionary, floated before Pliny’s
mind when he delivered his <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi> in the presence of Trajan.
That speech is at once an act of thanksgiving and a manifesto
of the Senate. The tone of fulsome extravagance is excused
by the joy at escaping from a treacherous tyranny, which drove
virtue into remote retreat, which made friendship impossible,
which poisoned the security of household life by a continual
fear of espionage.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 43, 44, 35.</note> The confidence which Pliny expresses in
the majestic strength, mingled with modesty and self-restraint,
which Trajan brought to the task of the principate, was amply
justified. The overwhelming force of the emperor seemed,
in the new age, to pass into the freely accepted rule of the
great citizen.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 24, 62, 63, 66.</note> Pliny indeed does not conceal from himself
the immense actual power of the emperor. He is the vicegerent
of God, an earthly Providence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 80.</note> His power is not less
than Nero’s or Domitian’s, but it is a power no longer wielded
wildly by selfish or cruel self-will; it is a power inspired by
benevolence, voluntarily submitting itself to the restraints of
law and ancient sentiment.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 62, 63, 64.</note> Founded on service and virtue,
it can fearlessly claim the loving support of the citizens,
while it recalls the freedom of the old Republic. A prince who
is hedged by the devotion of his people may dispense with
the horde of spies and informers, who have driven virtue into
banishment and made a crowd of sneaks and cowards. Free
speech has been restored. The Senate, which has so long been
expected to applaud with grovelling flattery the most trivial
or the most flagitious acts of the emperor, is summoned to a
share in the serious work of government.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 66.</note> A community of
interest and feeling secures to it a free voice in his counsels,
without derogating from his dignity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 72.</note> All this is expressed
by a scrupulous observance of old republican forms. The
commander of conquering legions, the Caesar, Augustus,
Pontifex Maximus, has actually condescended to take the oath
of office, standing before the consul seated in his chair!<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 64.</note> Here
we seem to have the key to the senatorial position. They
were ready to recognise the overwhelming power of the prince,
if he, for his part, would only respect in form, if not in substance,
the ancient dignity of the Senate. Tolerance, affability,
<pb n="44"/><anchor id="Pg44"/>politic deference to a great name, seemed to Pliny and his
kind a restoration of the ancient freedom, almost a revival of
the old Republic. Fortunately for the world a succession of
wise princes perceived that, by deference to the pride of the
Senate, they could secure the peace of their administration,
without diminishing its effective power.
</p>

<p>
Yet, even from Pliny’s <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi>, we can see that the
recognition of the prerogatives, or rather of the dignity, of
the Senate, the coexistence of old republican forms side by
side with imperial power, depended entirely on the grace and
tolerance of the master of the legions. Nothing could be more
curious than Pliny’s assertion of the senatorial claims, combined
with the most effusive gratitude to Trajan for conceding them.
The emperor is only <hi rend="italic">primus inter pares</hi>, and yet Pliny, by
the whole tone of his speech, admits that he is the master who
may equally indulge the constitutional claims or superstitions
of his subjects or trample on them. In the first century a
power, the extent of which depended only on the will of the
prince, and yet seemed limited by shadowy claims of ancient
tradition, was liable to be distrustful of itself and to be
challenged by pretenders. In actual fact, the prince was so
powerful that he might easily pass into a despot; in theory
he was only the first of Roman nobles, who might easily have
rivals among his own class. Pliny congratulates Trajan on
having, by his mildness and justice, escaped the terror of pretenders
which haunted the earlier emperors, and was often
justified and cruelly avenged.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 69.</note> In spite of the lavish splendour
of Nero or Caligula, the imperial household, till Hadrian’s
reorganisation, was still modelled on the lines of other great
aristocratic houses. Nero’s suspicions were more than once
excited by the scale of establishments like that of the Silani,
by wealth and display like Seneca’s, by the lustre of great
historic traditions in a gens like the Calpurnian.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 1; xiv. 52; xv.
48.</note> The loyalty
of Corbulo could not save him from the jealousy aroused by
his exploits in eastern war.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 63.17,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πᾶσι γὰρ παρ’ αὐτῷ δημόσιον ἔγκλημα ἦν ἀρετή τε καὶ πλοῦτος καὶ γένος</foreign>: Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 76.</note> And the power of great provincial
governors, in command of great armies, and administering
realms such as Gaul or Spain or Syria, was not an altogether
imaginary danger. If Domitian seemed distrustful of Agricola
<pb n="45"/><anchor id="Pg45"/>in Britain, we must remember that he had in his youth seen
Galba and Vindex marching on Rome, and his father concentrating
the forces of the East for the overthrow of Vitellius
in the great struggle on the Po.
</p>

<p>
The emperor’s fears and suspicions were immensely
aggravated by the adepts in the dark arts of the East. The
astrologers were a great and baneful power in the early Empire.
They inspired illicit ambitions, or they stimulated them, and
they often suggested to a timorous prince the danger of
conspiracy. These venal impostors, in the words of Tacitus,
were always being banished, but they always returned. For
the men who drove them into temporary exile had the
firmest faith in their skill. The prince would have liked to
keep a monopoly of it, while he withdrew from his nobles the
temptation which might be offered to their ambition by the
mercenary adept.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 32; xii. 52; D. Cass.
49. 43; D. Cass. 66. 10, 9; Suet <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> lxiii.</note> Dion Cassius and Suetonius, who were themselves
eager believers in this superstition, never fail to record
the influence of the diviners. The reign of Tiberius is full of
dark tales about them.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> xiv. lxix.</note> Claudius drove Scribonianus into
exile for consulting an astrologer about the term of his reign.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 52.</note>
On the appearance of a flaming comet, Nero was warned by
his diviner, Bilbilus, that a portent, which always boded ill
to kings, might be expiated by the blood of their nobles.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxxvi.</note>
Otho’s astrologer, Seleucus, who had promised that he should
survive Nero,<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, iv.</note> stimulated his ambition to be the successor of
Galba. Vitellius, as superstitious as Nero or Otho, cruelly
persecuted the soothsayers and ordered their expulsion from
Italy.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> xiv.</note> He was defied by a mocking edict of the tribe,
ordaining his own departure from earth by a certain day.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ne Vitellius Germanicus intra
eundem kalendarum diem usquam esset.</note>
Vespasian once more banished the diviners from Rome, but,
obedient to the superstition which cradled the power of his
dynasty, he retained the most skilful for his own guidance.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 10, 9.</note> The
terror of Domitian’s last days was heightened by a horoscope,
which long before had foretold the time and manner of his
end.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xv.</note> Holding such a faith as this, it is little wonder that
the emperors should dread its effect on rivals who were equally
<pb n="46"/><anchor id="Pg46"/>credulous, or that superstition, working on ambitious hopes,
should have been the nurse of treason. Thus the emperor’s
uncertain position made him ready to suspect and anticipate a
treachery which may often have had no existence. The objects
of his fears in their turn were driven into conspiracy, sometimes
in self-defence, sometimes from the wish to seize a prize
which seemed not beyond their grasp. Gossip, lampoon, and
epigram redoubled suspicion, while they retaliated offences.
And cruel repression either increased the danger of revolt in
the more daring, or the degradation of the more timorous.
</p>

<p>
In the eyes of Tacitus, the most terrible result of the tyranny
of the bad emperors was the fawning servility of a once proud
order, and their craven treachery in the hour of danger. He
has painted it with all the concentrated power of loathing and
pity. It is this almost personal degradation which inspires the
ruthless, yet haughtily restrained, force with which he blasts
for ever the memory of the Julio-Claudian despotism. It was
in this spirit that he penned the opening chapters of his
chronicle of the physical and moral horrors of the year in
which that tyranny closed. The voice of history has been
silenced or perverted, partly by the ignorance of public affairs,
partly by the eagerness of adulation, or the bitterness of
hatred. It was an age darkened by external disasters, save
on the eastern frontier, by seditions and civil war, and the
bloody death of four princes. The forces of nature seemed to
unite with the rage of men to deepen the universal tragedy.
Italy was overwhelmed with calamities which had been
unknown for many ages; Campania’s fairest cities were
swallowed up; Rome itself had been wasted by fire; the
ancient Capitol was given to the flames by the hands of
citizens. Polluted altars, adultery in high places, the islands
of the sea crowded with exiles, rank and wealth and virtue
made the mark for a cruel jealousy, all this forms an awful
picture.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 2.</note> But even more repulsive is the spectacle of treachery
rewarded with the highest place, slaves and clients betraying
their master for gain, and men without an enemy ruined by
their friends. When the spotless Octavia, overwhelmed by
the foulest calumnies, had been tortured to death, to satisfy
the jealousy of an adulteress, offerings were voted to the
<pb n="47"/><anchor id="Pg47"/>temples.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 64.</note> And Tacitus grimly requests his readers to presume
that, as often as a banishment or execution was ordered by
Nero, so often were thanksgivings offered to the gods. The
horrors of Nero’s remorse for the murder of Agrippina were
soothed by the flatteries and congratulations of his staff, and
the grateful sacrifices which were offered for his deliverance by
the Campanian towns.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 10, 12.</note> Still, the notes of a funereal trumpet
and ghostly wailings from his mother’s grave were ever in
his ears,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 10; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxxiv.</note> and he long doubted the reception which he might
meet with on his return to the capital. He need not have
had any anxiety. Senate and people vied with one another
in self-abasement. He was welcomed by all ranks and ages
with fawning enthusiasm as he passed along in triumphal
progress to return thanks on the Capitol for the success of an
unnatural crime.
</p>

<p>
The Pisonian conspiracy against Nero was undoubtedly
an important and serious event. Some of the greatest names
of the Roman aristocracy were involved in it, and the man
whom it would have placed on the throne, if not altogether
untainted by the excesses of his time, had some imposing
qualities which might make him seem a worthy competitor for
the principate.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 48.</note> But, to Tacitus, the conspiracy seems to be
chiefly interesting as a damning proof of the degradation of
the aristocracy under the reign of terror. Epicharis, the poor
freedwoman of light character, who bore the accumulating
torture of scourge and rack and fire, and the dislocation of
every limb, is brought into pathetic contrast with the high-born
senators and knights, who, without any compulsion of
torture, betrayed their relatives and friends.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 57.</note> Scaevinus, a man
of the highest rank, knowing himself betrayed by his freedman
and a Roman knight, revealed the whole plot.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 54.</note> The poet
Lucan tried in vain to purchase safety by involving his
own mother. But Nero was inexorable, and the poet died
worthily, reciting some verses from the <hi rend="italic">Pharsalia</hi>, which
describe a similar end.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 70; probably Lucan, <hi rend="italic">Phars.</hi> iii. 638.</note> The scenes which followed the
massacre are an awful revelation of cowardly sycophancy.
While the streets were thronged with the funerals of the victims,
<pb n="48"/><anchor id="Pg48"/>the altars on the Capitol were smoking with sacrifices of gratitude.
One craven after another, when he heard of the murder
of a brother or a dear friend, would deck his house with
laurels, and, falling at the emperor’s feet, cover his hand
with kisses.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 71.</note> The Senate prostrated themselves before Nero
when, stung by the popular indignation, he appeared to
justify his deed. The august body voted him thanksgivings
and honours.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 73.</note> The consul elect, one of the Anician house,
proposed that a temple should be built with all speed to the
divine Nero! Tacitus relieves this ghastly spectacle of effeminate
cowardice by a scene which is probably intended, by way
of contrast, to save the tradition of Roman dignity. Vestinus,
the consul of that fatal year, had been a boon companion of
the emperor, and had shown contempt for his cowardice in
dangerous banter. Nero was eager to find him implicated
in the plot, but no evidence of his guilt could be obtained.
All legal forms at length were flung aside, and a cohort was
ordered to surround his house. Vestinus was at dinner in his
palace which towered over the Forum, surrounded by guests,
with a train of handsome slaves in waiting, when he received
the mandate. He rose at once from table, and shut himself in
his chamber with his physician, lancet in hand, by his side.
His veins were opened, and, without a word of self-pity,
Vestinus allowed his life to ebb away in the bath.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 68, 69.</note>
</p>

<p>
Vestinus, after all, only asserted, in the fashion of the time,
his right to choose the manner of a death which could not be
evaded. But Tacitus, here and there, gives glimpses of self-sacrifice,
courageous loyalty and humanity, which save his
picture of society from utter gloom. The love and devotion
of women shine out more brightly than ever against the
background of baseness. Tender women follow their husbands
or brothers into exile, or are found ready to share their death.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 16; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi>
xv. 63.</note>
Even the slave girls of Octavia brave torture and death in
their hardy defence of her fair fame.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 60.</note> There is no more
pathetic story of female heroism than that of Politta, the
daughter of L. Vetus. He had been colleague of the emperor
in the consulship, but he had the misfortune to be father-in-law
<pb n="49"/><anchor id="Pg49"/>of Rubellius Plautus, whose lofty descent and popularity drew
down the sentence of death, even in distant exile.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 22, 57.</note> Politta had
clasped the bleeding neck of Plautus in her arms, and nursed
her sorrow in an austere widowhood.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvi. 10.</note> She now besieged the
doors of Nero with prayers, and even menaces, for her father’s
acquittal. Vetus himself was of the nobler sort of Roman men,
who even then were not extinct. When he was advised, in order
to save the remnant of his property for his grandchildren, to
make the emperor chief heir, he spurned the servile proposal,
divided his ready money among his slaves, and prepared for the
end.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvi. 11.</note> When all hope was abandoned, father, grandmother, and
daughter opened their veins and died together in the bath.
Plautius Lateranus met his end with the same stern dignity.
Forbidden even to give a last embrace to his children, and
dragged to the scene of servile executions, he died in silence by
the hand of a man who was an undiscovered partner in the plot.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 60.</note>
Even the mob of Rome, for whose fickle baseness Tacitus has a
profound scorn, now and then reveal a wholesome moral feeling.
When Octavia, on a trumped-up charge of adultery, was
divorced and banished by Nero, the clamour of the populace
forced him to recall her for a time, and the mob went so far
in their virtuous enthusiasm as to overthrow the statues of
the adulteress Poppaea, and crown the images of Octavia with
flowers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 61.</note> Perhaps even more striking is the humane feeling
displayed towards the slaves of the urban prefect, Pedanius
Secundus. He had been murdered by a slave, and the ancient
law required, in such a case, the execution of the whole household.
The proposal to carry out the cruel custom drove the
populace almost to revolt. And it is a relief to find that a
strong minority of the Senate were on the side of humanity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 42, senatusque obsessus in
quo ipso erant studia nimiam severitatem
aspernantium.</note>
But the army, above all other classes, still bred a rough, honest
virtue. It was left, amid the general effeminate cowardice,
for a tribune of a pretorian cohort to tell Nero to his face that
he loathed him as a murderer and an incendiary.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 67.</note> Again and
again, in that terrible year, when great nobles were flattering
the Emperor, whom in a few days or hours they meant to
desert, the common soldiers remained true to the death of
<pb n="50"/><anchor id="Pg50"/>their unworthy chiefs. When Otho redeemed a tainted life
by a not ignoble end, the pretorians kissed his wounds, bore
him with tears to burial, and many killed themselves over his
corpse.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 49.</note> In the storming of the pretorian camp by the troops
of Vespasian, the soldiers of Vitellius, outnumbered and doomed
to certain defeat, fell to a man with all their wounds in front.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 84.</note>
</p>

<p>
To these faithful, though often bloodthirsty, warriors the
senators and knights of those days offered a contemptible
contrast. Often the inheritors of great names and great
traditions, the mass of them knew nothing of arms or the
military virtue of their ancestors.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 88, segnis et oblita bellorum
nobilitas, etc.</note> Sunk in sloth and
enervated by excess, they followed Otho to the battlefield
on the Po with their cooks and minions and all the apparatus
of luxury.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 88.</note> In the rapid changes of fortune, from Galba
to Otho, from Otho to Vitellius, from Vitellius to Vespasian,
the great nobles had one guiding principle, the determination
to be on the winning side. It was indeed a puzzling and
anxious time for a calculating selfishness, when a reign might
not last for a month, and when the adulation of Otho or
Vitellius in the Senate-house was disturbed by the sound of
the legions advancing from East and West. But the
supple cowards of the Senate proved equal to the strain.
They had the skill to flatter their momentary master without
any compromising word against his probable successor. They
soothed the anxieties of Vitellius with unstinted adulation,
yet carefully refrained from anything reflecting on the
Flavianist leaders.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 37, nulla in oratione cujusquam
erga Flavianos duces obtrectatio;
cf. i. 90; of the Acta of the Arval College,
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2051 sq.</note> Within a few months, full of joy and
hope, which were now at last well founded, they were voting
all the customary honours of a new principate to Vespasian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 3.</note>
The terror of Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero had done its work
effectually. And its worst result was the hopeless self-abandonment
and sluggish cowardice of a class, whose chief
<hi rend="italic">raison d’être</hi> in every age is to maintain a tradition of gallant
dignity. It is true that many of the scions of great houses
were mere mendicants, ruined by confiscation or prodigality, and
compelled to live on the pension by which the emperor kept
them in shameful dependence,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, x.; <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xvii.; Spart.
<hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 7, § 9.</note> or on the meaner dole of some
<pb n="51"/><anchor id="Pg51"/>wealthy patron.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 100.</note> A Valerius Messala, grandson of the great
Corvinus, had to accept a pension from Nero.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 34.</note> A grandson
of Hortensius had to endure the contempt of Tiberius in
obtaining a grant for his sons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 37, 38.</note> Others were unmanned by the
voluptuous excesses of an age which had carried the ingenuity
of sensual allurement to its utmost limits. The hopelessness
of any struggle with a power so vast as that of the emperor,
so ruthless and wildly capricious as that of the Claudian
Caesars, reduced many to despairing apathy.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 35.</note> And while,
from a safe historic distance, we pour our contempt on the
cringing Senate of the first century, it might be well to remind
ourselves of their perils and their tortures. There was many
a senatorial house, like that of the Pisos, whose leading
members were never allowed to reach middle age.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 33; cf. iii. 19.</note> Much
should be forgiven to a class which was daily and hourly
exposed to such danger, so sudden in its onsets, so secret and
stealthy, so all-pervading. It might come in an open circumstantial
indictment, with all the forms of law and the weight of
suborned testimony; it might appear in a quiet order for suicide;
the stroke might descend at the farthest limits of the Empire,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 58.</note>
in some retreat in Spain or Asia. The haunting fear of death
had an unnerving effect. But not less degrading were the
outrages to Roman, or ordinary human dignity to which the
noble order had to submit for more than a generation. They
had seen their wives defiled or compelled to expose themselves
as harlots in a foul spectacle, to gratify the diseased prurience
of the emperor.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxxvii.</note> They had been forced to fight in the arena
or to exhibit themselves on the tragic stage.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 14; Juv. viii. 193;
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xviii. xxx.; D. Cass. lix.
10.</note> Men who had
borne the ancient honours of the consulship had been ordered
to run for miles beside the chariot of Caligula, or to wait at
his feet at dinner.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxvii.</note> Fathers had had to witness without
flinching the execution of their sons, and drink smilingly to
the emperor on the evening of the fatal day.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 33.</note> The only
safety at such a court lay in calmly accepting insults with
affected gratitude. The example of Nero’s debauchery, and
the seductive charm which he undoubtedly possessed, were
<pb n="52"/><anchor id="Pg52"/>probably as enfeebling and demoralising as the Terror. He
formed a school, which laughed at all virtue and made self-indulgence
a fine art. Men who had shared in these obscene
revels were the leaders in the awful scenes of perfidy, lust,
and cruelty which appropriately followed the death of their
patron.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 12; xvi. 18; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> iv.</note> Some of them, Petronius, Otho, Vitellius, closed
their career appropriately by a tragic death. But others
lived on into the age of reformation, to defame the stout
Sabine soldier who saved the Roman world.<note place="foot">Renan, <hi rend="italic">Les Év.</hi> p. 140. Some of
their anonymous sneers may be traced
in Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xvi. xxiii. xiv.; cf.
Duruy, iv. 653.</note>
</p>

<p>
In spite of the manly virtue and public spirit of Vespasian,
the Roman world had to endure a fierce ordeal before it
entered on the peace of the Antonine age. Even Vespasian’s
reign was troubled by conspiracy.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 16,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐπεβουλεύθη μὲν ὑπό τε τοῦ Ἀλιηνοῦ καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ Μαρκέλλου</foreign>.
Cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xiv.; Macé,
<hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 86.</note> His obscure origin moved
the contempt of the great senatorial houses who still survived.
His republican moderation gave the philosophic doctrinaires a
chance of airing their impossible dream of restoring a municipal
Republic to govern a world. His conscientious frugality,
which was absolutely needed to retrieve the bankruptcy of the
Neronian régime, was despised and execrated both by the nobles
and the mob. Another lesson was needed both by the Senate
and the philosophers. Society had yet to be purged as by fire,
and the purging came with the accession of Domitian.
</p>

<p>
The inner secret of that sombre reign will probably remain
for ever a mystery. There is the same question about
Domitian as there is about Tiberius. Was he bad from the
beginning, or was he gradually corrupted by the consciousness
of immense power,<note place="foot">Cf. Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 169 sqq.;
Bury, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Emp.</hi> p. 395.</note> and the fear of the great order who
might challenge it? Our authorities do not furnish a satisfying
answer. We know Domitian only from the narrative of
men steeped in senatorial traditions and prejudices,<note place="foot"><anchor id="Note52"/>On the sources of the history of the
Flavians, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Krause, <hi rend="italic">De C. Sueton.
Tranq. Fontibus</hi>; Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p.
364, 376; Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt. d. Kaiserzeit</hi>,
ii. 69, 70. For the senatorial
attitude to Domitian, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi>
48; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 3, 41, 42, 45; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv.
51; iv. 2; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xxiii.</note> and,
some of them, intoxicated by the vision of a reconciliation
of the principate with the republican ideals. The dream
was a noble one, and it was about to be partially realised
<pb n="53"/><anchor id="Pg53"/>for three generations, under a succession of good emperors.
But the men inspired with such an ideal were not likely to be
impartial judges of an emperor like Domitian. And even
from their narrative of his reign, we can see that he was not,
at least in the early years of his reign,<note place="foot">Nagel, <hi rend="italic">Imp. T. Flav. Domitianus
iniquius dijudicatus</hi>.</note> the utter monster he
has been painted. Even severe judges in modern days admit
that he was an able and strenuous man, with a clear, cold,
cynical intellect,<note place="foot">Meriv. vii. 356.</note> which recognised some of the great problems
of the time, and strove to solve them. He was indefatigable in
judicial work.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> viii.</note> In spite of the sneers at his mock triumphs,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 39; cf. 41, tot exercitus
in Moesia ... amissi. D. Cass. 67. 4,
7; cf. Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> iv. 3, 153; Mart.
ix. 102; vii. 80, 91, 95; Meriv. vii.
347.</note>
his military and provincial administration was probably
guided by a sound conception of the resources and the
dangers of the Empire. His recall of Agricola, after a seven
years’ command in Britain, was attributed to jealousy and fear.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 39.</note>
It is more probable that it was dictated by a wish to stop a
campaign which was diverting large sums to the conquest of
barren mountains. Domitian was an orator and verse writer
of some merit, and he gave his patronage, although not in a
very liberal way, to men like Quintilian, Statius, and Martial.<note place="foot">Quintil. iv.,
    <anchor id="corr53"/><corr sic="proem.">prooem.</corr> 2; Statius,
<hi rend="italic">Silvae</hi>, iv. 2, 13; iii. 1, 1; Mart. ii.
91; iv. 27, iii. 95. For the flattery
of Martial, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> esp. v. 19, 6; ix. 4;
<hi rend="italic">Spectac.</hi> 33.</note>
Like Nero, he felt the force of the new Hellenist movement,
and, under forms sanctioned by Roman antiquarians, he established
a quinquennial festival in which literary genius was
pompously rewarded.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> iv.</note> He had the public libraries, which had
been devastated by fires in the previous reigns, liberally restocked
with fresh stores of MSS. from Alexandria.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xx.</note> He gave
close attention, whatever we may think of his science, to the
economic problems of the Empire. And his discouragement
of the vine, in favour of a greater acreage of corn, would find
sympathy in our own time, as it was applauded by Apollonius
of Tyana.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii.; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> vi.
42; <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 12.</note> The man who decimated the Roman aristocracy
towards the end of his reign, advanced to high positions some
of those who were destined to be his bitterest defamers. Pliny
and Tacitus and Trajan’s father rose to high office in the
<pb n="54"/><anchor id="Pg54"/>earlier part of Domitian’s reign.<note place="foot">Pliny was probably Quaestor in 90
<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>; Trib. Pleb. 92; Praetor 93. Cf.
Momms. (Morel) p. 61. Tacitus says,
<hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 1, dignitatem a Domitiano
(81-96) longius provectam non abnuerim.
From <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 11 it appears
that he was Praetor in 88. Cf. Peter,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 43.</note> He designated to the
consulship such men as Nerva, Trajan, Verginius Rufus,
Agricola, and the grandfather of Antoninus Pius.<note place="foot">Duruy, iv. 697 n.</note> This strange
character was also a moral reformer of the antiquarian type.
He punished erring Vestals, <hi rend="italic">more majorum</hi>. He revived the
Scantinian law against those enormities of the East, of which
Statius shows that the emperor was not guiltless himself.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> iii. 4, 37.</note> Yet
a voluptuary, with a calm outlook on his time, may have a wish
to restrain vices with which he is himself tainted. A statesman
may be a puritan reformer, both in religion and morals, without
being personally severe and devout. Domitian may have
had a genuine, if a pedantic, desire to restore the old Roman
tone in morals and religion. He was, after all, sprung from a
sober Sabine stock,<note place="foot">Meriv. vii. 354.</note> although he may have sadly degenerated
from it in his own conduct. And his attempt to reform Roman
society may perhaps have been as sincere as that of Augustus.
</p>

<p>
But there can be little doubt that Domitian, although he
was astute and able, was also a bad man, with the peculiar
traits which always make a man unpopular. He was disloyal
as a son and as a brother. He was morose, and he cultivated
a suspicious solitude,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 67. 14; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiv.</note> around which evil rumour is sure to
gather. The rumour in his case may have been well-founded,
although we are not bound to believe all the tales of prurient
gossip which Suetonius has handed down. It is the penalty
of high place that peccadilloes are magnified into sins, and
sins are multiplied and exaggerated. It was a recognised and
effective mode of flattering a new emperor to blacken the
character of his predecessors; Domitian himself allowed his
court poets to vilify Caligula and Nero.<note place="foot">Mart. iv. 63; vi. 21, crudelis
nullaque invisior umbra.</note> And Pliny in his
fulsome adulation of Trajan, finds his most effective resource in
a perpetual contrast with Domitian. Tacitus could never forgive
the recall and humiliation of his father-in-law. The Senate
as a whole bore an implacable hatred to the man who carried
to its furthest point the assertion of imperial prerogative.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xxiii.</note>
<pb n="55"/><anchor id="Pg55"/>Still the authorities are so unanimous that we are bound to
believe that Domitian, with some strength and ability, had
many execrable qualities. He shows the contradictions of a
nature in which the force of a sturdy rural ancestry has not
been altogether sapped by the temptations of luxury and
power. He had a passionate desire to rival the military glory
of his father and brother, yet he was too cautious and self-indulgent
to attain it. He had some taste for literature, but
he kept literature in leading-strings, and put one man to death
for his delight in certain speeches in Livy, and another for a
too warm eulogy of Thrasea and Helvidius Priscus.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x.</note> He threw
his whole strength into a moral and religious reaction, while
he was the bitterest enemy of the republican pretensions and
dreams of the Senate. Great historical critics have called him
a hypocrite.<note place="foot">Renan, <hi rend="italic">Les Évang.</hi> p. 291, Domitien,
comme tous les souverains hypocrites,
se montraite sévère conservateur.</note> It may be doubted whether any single phrase
or formula could express the truth about such a twisted and
perverse <anchor id="corr55"/><corr sic="character">character.</corr> Probably his dominant passion was vanity
and love of grandiose display. He assumed the consulship
seventeen times, a number quite unexampled.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiii.</note> His pompous
triumphs for unreal victories were a subject of common jest.
He filled the Capitol with images of himself, and a colossal
statue towered for a time over the temple roofs.<note place="foot">Mart. viii. 65.</note> The son
and brother of emperors, already exalted to divine honours, he
went farther than any of his predecessors in claiming divinity
for himself, and he allowed his ministers and court poets to
address him as <q>our Lord God.</q><note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiii.; Mart. v. 8, 1 (<hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Friedländer’s note), vii. 2 and 34; viii.
2, 6; Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> v. 1, 37; Meriv. vii.
375.</note> His lavish splendour in
architecture was to some extent justified by the ravages of fire
in previous reigns. But the £2,400,000 expended on the
gilding of a temple on the Capitol,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi>
    <anchor id="corr55-2"/><corr sic="v">v.</corr>; Gregorov. <hi rend="italic">Gesch. St.
Rom.</hi> i. 41.</note> was only one item in an
extravagance which drained the treasury. Its radiance, which
dazzled the eyes of Rutilius in the reign of Honorius,<note place="foot">Rutil. Namat. i. 93.</note> was
paid for in blood and tears. The emperor, who was the ruthless
enemy of the nobles, like all his kind, was profusely
indulgent to the army and the mob. The legions had their pay
increased by a fourth. The populace of Rome were pampered
<pb n="56"/><anchor id="Pg56"/>with costly and vulgar spectacles,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> v. <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi>; iv.</note> as they were to the end of
the Western Empire. Domitian’s indulgence of that fierce and
obscene proletariat was only a little more criminal than that
of other emperors, because it ended in a bankruptcy which was
followed by robbery and massacre. While the rich and noble
were assailed on any trivial accusation, in order to fill an
empty treasury, the beasts of Numidia were tearing their
victims, gladiators were prostituting a noble courage in dealing
inglorious wounds in the arena, and fleets of armed galleys
charged and crashed in mimic, yet often deadly, battle in the
flooded Flavian amphitheatre.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 67. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
To repair this waste the only resource was plunder. But
Domitian was a pettifogger as well as a plunderer; he would
fleece or assassinate his victims under forms of law. The
law of majesty, and the many laws for restoring old Roman
morality, needed only a little ingenuity and effrontery to
furnish lucrative grounds for impeachment.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xii.</note> The tribe of
delators were ready to his hand. He had punished them for
serving Nero; they were now to reap a richer harvest under
Domitian. Every fortune which rose above mediocrity, every
villa with rich pastures and woodlands in the Apennines, or
on the northern lakes, was marked for plunder.<note place="foot">Pliny, <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 50.</note> Domitian was
the first and only emperor who assumed the censorship for
life.<note place="foot">Dion Cass. 67. 4,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τιμητὴς δὲ διὰ βίου πρῶτος δὲ καὶ μόνος καὶ ἰδιωτῶν καὶ αὐτοκρατόρων ἐχειροτονήθη</foreign>: Momms.
<hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> ii. 1012.</note> The office made him absolute master of the lives and
fortunes of his nobles. A casual word, a thoughtless gesture,
might be construed into an act of treason; and the slave
households furnished an army of spies. Nay, even kindred
and near friends were drawn into this vast conspiracy against
domestic peace and security. It may be admitted that
Domitian had to face a real peril. The rebellion of Antonius
Saturninus was an attempt which no prince could treat lightly,
and the destruction of the correspondence in which so many
men of rank were involved, may well have heightened
Domitian’s alarm.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 67. 11.</note> He struck out blindly and savagely.
He compelled the Senate to bear a part in the massacre, and
Tacitus has confessed, with pathetic humiliation, his silent share
in the murder of the upright and innocent.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 45.</note> Yet the imperial
<pb n="57"/><anchor id="Pg57"/>inquisitor was himself racked with terror in his last hours. He
walked in a corridor where the walls were lined with mirrors,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiv. parietes phengite lapide distinxit.</note>
so that no unseen hand might strike him from behind. On
his last morning he started in terror from his bed and called
for the diviner whom he had summoned from Germany.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvi.</note> But,
amid all his terror, Domitian had a deep natural love of
cruelty. He was never more dangerous than when he chose
to be agreeable;<note place="foot">D. Cass. 67. 9.</note> he loved to play with his victims. What
a grim delight in exquisite torture, what a cynical contempt
for the Roman nobles, are revealed in the tale of his funereal
banquet!<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 67. 4.</note> The select company were ushered into a chamber
draped from floor to ceiling in black. At the head of each
couch stood a pillar like a tombstone, with the guest’s name
engraved upon it, while overhead swung a cresset such as men
hang in vaults of the dead. A troop of naked boys, black as
all around, danced an awful measure, and then set on the
dismal meal which was offered, by old Roman use, to the spirits
of the departed. The guests were palsied with terror, expecting
every moment to be their last. And the death-like
silence was only broken by the voice of the Emperor as he
told a gruesome tale of bloody deaths. In such cynicism of
lawless power, in such meek degradation of a once proud
order, did the tyranny of the first century reach its close.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="2" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="58"/><anchor id="Pg58"/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. The world of the satirist"/><index index="pdf" level1="II. The world of the satirist"/>
<head>CHAPTER II</head>

<head type="sub">THE WORLD OF THE SATIRIST</head>

<p>
Juvenal and Tacitus, although they moved in different circles
and probably never met, have much in common. Both were
released from an ignominious silence by the death of Domitian.
Both were then at the age which combines the ripeness
of experience and reflection with a fire and energy still
unflagging.<note place="foot">Tacitus b. probably 55 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Dial.
de Or.</hi> 1, juvenis admodum in 75
or 76; cf. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 9. He was betrothed
in 77 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>; cf. Meriv. viii. 92; Peter,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 43; Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi> iv.
Juvenal b. <hi rend="italic">circ.</hi> 55 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> (Peter, ii. 77);
decessit longo senio confectus exul Ant.
Pio imp. Vit. iv.; Teuffel, § 326, 1.</note> They were, from different causes, both filled with
hatred and disgust for the vices of their time, and their experience
had engendered in both a pessimism which darkened
their faith. Tacitus belonged to the senatorial order who had
held high office, and had seen its ranks decimated and its
dignity outraged under the tyranny. Juvenal sprang from the
lower middle class, which hated alike the degenerate noble and
the insolent <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi> far more than it hated even a Domitian.
Yet both Juvenal and Tacitus are united in a passionate
admiration for the old Roman character. Their standards and
ideals are drawn from the half-mythical ages of the simple
warriors and farmer-statesmen of the old Republic. And their
estimate of their time needs to be scrutinised in the light both
of their hatreds and of their ideals.
</p>

<p>
The life of Juvenal is wrapt in obscurity, although nine
lives of him are extant.<note place="foot">Nettleship, <hi rend="italic">Lectures and Essays</hi>,
pp. 118 sqq.</note> Scholars are still at variance as to
the date of his birth, the date of many of his satires, and
especially as to the time and circumstances of his banishment,
about which there is so uniform a tradition. But, for our
purpose, some facts are clear enough. Juvenal was the son of
<pb n="59"/><anchor id="Pg59"/>a well-to-do freedman of Aquinum, and rose to the highest
magisterial office in his native town at some time of his career.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5599, IIVir. Quinq.
Flamen Divi Vespasiani.</note>
He carefully hides his personal history from us; but we might
gather from his Satires that he belonged to the lower middle
class,<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 316.</note> that he was in temper and tone an old plebeian of the
times of the Republic, although vividly touched by the ideas
of a new morality which had been afloat for more than two
generations. But, like Tacitus, he has little sympathy with the
great philosophic movement which was working a silent revolution.
He had the rhetorical training of the time, with all
its advantages and its defects. And he is more a rhetorician
than a poet. We can well believe the report that his early
literary enthusiasm found vent in declamation on those
mythical or frivolous themes which exercised the youth in
the Roman schools for many centuries. Although he was
hardly a poor man<note place="foot">Juv. xi. 74, 150; cf. xiv. 322.</note> in the sense in which Martial, his
friend, was poor, yet he had stooped to bear the ignominy and
hardships of client dependence. He had hurried in rain and
storm in the early morning to receptions at great houses on
the Esquiline, through the squalor and noises and congested
traffic of the Suburra.<note place="foot">Mart. xii. 18.</note> He had doubtless often been a guest
at those <q>unequal dinners,</q> where the host, who was himself
regaled with far-fetched dainties and old crusted Alban or
Setine wine, insulted his poorer friends by offering them the
cheapest vintage and the meanest fare.<note place="foot">Juv. v. 30 sqq.; cf. Mart. iii. 49;
iii. 60.</note> He had been compelled,
as a matter of social duty, to sit through the recitation
of those ambitious and empty Theseids and Thebaids, with which
the rich amateur in literature in those days afflicted his long-suffering
friends.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 52; Mart. x. 4; iv. 49.</note> He may have been often elbowed aside by
some supple, clever Greek, with versatile accomplishments and
infinite audacity. He may have been patronised or insulted by
a millionaire <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi>, like the Trimalchio of Petronius, tainted
with the memories of a shameful servitude. He saw new
vulgar wealth everywhere triumphant, while the stiff, yet, in
many ways, wholesome conventionality of old Roman life was
defied and trampled upon by an aggressive vulgarity. In such
a world there was little room for the man whose wealth is
<pb n="60"/><anchor id="Pg60"/>in his genius, and who clings to the traditions of ages which
believed that men had a soul as well as a body. A man like
Juvenal, living in such a society, almost necessarily becomes
embittered. Like Johnson, in his Grub Street days, he will
have his hours when bitterness passes into self-abandonment,
and he will sound the depths of that world of corruption which
in his better moods he loathes. Some of the associates of
Juvenal were of very doubtful position, and more than doubtful
morals;<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 43: v. 30 sqq.; ix. 10 sqq.;
xi. 186.</note> and the warmth of some of his realistic painting of
dark sides of Roman life arouses the suspicion that he may
have at times forgotten his moral ideal. He certainly knows
the shameful secrets of Roman life almost as well as his friend
Martial does. But his knowledge, however gained, was turned
to a very different purpose from that which inspired Martial’s
brilliant prurience.<note place="foot">It has been remarked that Martial’s
Epigrams on Juvenal all contain some
obscenity, vii. 24; vii. 91, xii. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Satires of Juvenal were probably not given to the
world till after the death of Domitian.<note place="foot">Teuffel, § 326, 4; Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch.
Litt.</hi> ii. 77; Nettleship, <hi rend="italic">Lectures and
Essays</hi>, p. 122, brings together the indications
of date from 96-127 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> He
thinks that perhaps some of the earlier
<hi rend="italic">Satires</hi> belong to the last years of
Domitian, and that the words, spes
et ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum,
in <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> vii., may refer to that Emperor
(p. 132).</note> The date of the earliest
is about 100 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, that of the latest probably 127. Juvenal
cautiously disguises his attacks on his own time. He whets his
sword against the sinners whose ashes have long reposed beside
the Flaminian and the Latin ways.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 170.</note> Very few of his contemporaries
appear in his pages,<note place="foot">Marius Priscus, Isaeus, Archigenes.</note> and the scenery is often that
of the reigns of Tiberius, Claudius, or Nero. But his deepest
and most vivid impressions must have come to Juvenal in that
period which has been photographed with such minute exactness
by Martial. And there is a striking correspondence between
the two writers, not only in many of the characters whom they
introduce, but in their pictures of the whole state of morals and
letters.<note place="foot">See a comparison of passages in
Nettleship, pp. 125 sqq.</note> They both detested that frigid epic which laboriously
ploughed the sands of conventional legend, and they turned
with weariness from the old-world tales of Thebes or Argos to
the real tragedy or comedy of Roman life around them.
Although they were friends and companions, it is needless to
<pb n="61"/><anchor id="Pg61"/>assume any close partnership in their studies. Starting with
the same literary impulse, they deal to a large extent with the
same vices and follies, some of them peculiar to their own age,
others common to all ages of Rome, or even of the world of
civilisation. A long list might easily be compiled of their
common stock of subjects, and their common antipathies. In
both writers we meet the same grumbling of the needy client
against insolent or niggardly patrons, the complaints of the
struggling man of letters about the extravagant rewards of low
vulgar impostors. Both are bored to death, like the patient
Pliny, by the readings of wealthy scribblers, or by tiresome
pleadings in the courts, measured by many a turn of the
clepsydra. They feel an equal disgust for the noise and
squalor of the narrow streets, an equal love for the peace and
freshness and rough plenty of the country farm. In both may
be seen the scions of great houses reduced to mendicancy,
ambitious poverty betaking itself to every mean or disreputable
device, the legacy-hunter courting the childless rich with
flattery or vicious compliance. You will often encounter the
sham philosopher, as you meet him sixty years afterwards in
the pages of Lucian, with his loud talk of virtue and illustrious
names, while his cloak covers all the vices of dog and ape. Both
deal rather ungently with the character of women,—their
intrigues with actors, gladiators, and slaves, their frequent
divorces and rapid succession of husbands, their general
abandonment of antique matronly reserve. Both have, in fact,
with different motives, uncovered the secret shame of the
ancient world; and, more even than by that shame, was their
indignation moved by the great social revolution which was
confusing all ranks, and raising old slaves, cobblers, and
auctioneers to the benches of the knights.
</p>

<p>
Yet with this resemblance in the subjects of their choice,
there is the widest difference between the two writers in their
motive and mode of treatment. Martial, of course, is not a
moralist at all; the mere suggestion excites a smile. He is a
keen and joyous observer of the faults and follies, the lights
and shades, of a highly complex and artificial society which is
<q>getting over-ripe.</q> In the power of mere objective description
and minute portraiture of social life, Martial is almost
unique. Through his verses, we know the society of Domitian
<pb n="62"/><anchor id="Pg62"/>as we know hardly any other period of ancient society. But
this very vividness and truthfulness is chiefly due to the fact
that Martial was almost without a conscience. He was indeed
personally, perhaps, not so bad as he is often painted.<note place="foot">He says of himself, i. 5, 8, lasciva
est nobis pagina, vita proba est; cf. iii.
68; v. 2; Ausonius urges the same
plea, cf. <hi rend="italic">Idyll.</hi> xiii. Pliny finds a
long series of examples to warrant his
indulgence in loose verses, <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv.
14; cf. v. 3. It was a bad tradition
of literature; cf. Nettleship, <hi rend="italic">Lectures
and Essays</hi>, p. 39.</note> He
knows and can appreciate a good woman;<note place="foot">i. 14; iv. 13, 75.</note> he can love, with
the simplest, unsophisticated love, an innocent slave-child, the
poor little Erotion,<note place="foot">v. 34, 37; x. 61.</note> whom he has immortalised. He can
honour a simple manly character, free from guile and pretence.<note place="foot">i. 79; vii. 52.</note>
He has a genuine, exuberant love of the fresh joys of
country life, sharpened, no doubt, by the experience of the
client’s sordid slavery, amid the mingled poverty and lavish
splendour of the capital.<note place="foot">iii. 58; i. 56; ii. 38; cf. iii. 38.</note> Where could one find a fresher,
prettier idyll than his picture of the farm of Faustinus, with its
packed granaries, and its cellars fragrant with the juice of many
an old autumn vintage, the peacock spreading his jewelled
plumage, and the ring-dove cooing overhead from the towers?
The elegant slaves of the great house in the city are having
a holiday, and busy, under the bailiff’s care, with rural toils,
or fishing in the stream. The tall daughters of the neighbouring
cottages bring in their well-stocked baskets to the
villa, and all gather joyously at evening to a plenteous meal.<note place="foot">iii. 58.</note>
Martial has, moreover, one great virtue, which is a powerful antidote
for many moral faults, the love of the far-off home of his
childhood, the rugged Bilbilis, with its iron foundries near
the sources of the Tagus, to which he retreated from the crush
and din of plebeian life at Rome, and where he rests.<note place="foot">i. 50; iv. 55; xii. 18.</note> But
when charity or justice has done its best for Martial,
and no scholar will repudiate the debt, it still remains true
that he represents, perhaps better than any other, that pagan
world, naked and unabashed, and feels no breath of inspiration
from the great spiritual movement which, in paganism itself,
was setting towards an ideal of purity and self-conquest.
</p>

<p>
Juvenal, at least in his later work, reveals a moral
standard and motive apparently unknown to Martial.<note place="foot">Especially <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> xi. xiii. xiv. xv.;
cf. Munding, <hi rend="italic">Über die Sat. Juv.</hi> p. 12.</note> It may
<pb n="63"/><anchor id="Pg63"/>be admitted, indeed, that Juvenal did not always write under
the same high impulse. He had the rhetorician’s love of
fine, telling phrases, and startling effects. He had a rare gift
of realistic painting, and he exults in using it. He has also
burning within him an old plebeian pride which looked down
at once on the degenerate son of an ancient house, and on
the <hi rend="italic">nouveaux riches</hi>, whose rise seemed to him the triumph of
vulgar opulence without the restraint of traditions or ideals.
Conscious of great talents, with a character almost fierce in
its energy, he felt a burning hatred of a society which seemed
to value only material success, or those supple and doubtful
arts which could invent some fresh stimulus for exhausted
appetite. In Juvenal a great silent, sunken class, whom
we hardly know otherwise than from the inscriptions on their
tombs,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Bk. ii. c. 3 of this work. M.
Boissier has thrown a vivid light on
this class in his <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> iii. 3.</note> finds for once a powerful voice and a terrible avenger.
But, along with this note of personal or class feeling, there is
in Juvenal a higher moral intuition, a vision of a higher life,
which had floated before some Roman minds long before his
time,<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 198; Nettleship,
<hi rend="italic">Lectures and Essays</hi> p. 136.</note> and which was destined to broaden into an accepted ideal.
Juvenal, indeed, was no philosopher, and he had, like Tacitus,
all the old Roman distrust of the theories of the schools.<note place="foot">xiii. 120; ii. 1 sqq.; cf. Mart.
ix. 48.</note>
He had probably little respect for such teaching as Seneca’s.<note place="foot">He refers, however, with respect
to Seneca, viii. 212.</note>
Yet in important points he and Seneca belong to the same order
of the elect. Although, perhaps, a less spotless character than
Tacitus, he is far more advanced and modern in his breadth
of sympathy and moral feeling. He feels acutely for the
conquered provinces which have been fleeced and despoiled
of their wealth and artistic treasures, and which are still
exposed to the peculation and cruelty of governors and their
train.<note place="foot">viii. 90 sqq.; cf. Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi>
p. 332.</note> He denounces, like Seneca, the contempt and cruelty often
shown to slaves. The man whose ideal seems often to be drawn
from the hard, stern warriors who crushed the Samnites and
baffled the genius of Hannibal, in his old age has come to
glorify pity and tenderness for suffering as the best gift of
God, the gift that separates him most widely from the brute
<pb n="64"/><anchor id="Pg64"/>creation.<note place="foot">Juv. xv. 131; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, i. 5;
ii. 10, 25; iii. 24.</note> He preaches sympathy and mutual help, in an
age torn by selfish individualist passions. He denounces the
lust for revenge almost in the tones of a Christian preacher.<note place="foot">Juv. xiii. 190.</note>
What heathen moralist has painted more vividly the horrors
of the guilty conscience, that unseen inquisitor, with sterner
more searching eyes than Rhadamanthus? Who has taught
with greater power that the root of sin is in the evil thought?<note place="foot">xiii. 208, nam scelus intra se tacitum
qui cogitat ullum Facti crimen
habet.</note>
Juvenal realises, like Tacitus and Quintilian, the curse of a
tainted ancestry, and the incalculable importance of pure
example in the education of youth.<note place="foot">xiv. 30; Tac. <hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> 28, 29.</note> He, who knew so well
the awful secrets of Roman households, sets an immense value
on the treasure of an untainted boyhood, like that of the ploughman’s
son, who waits at Juvenal’s simple meal <q>and sighs for
his mother, and the little cottage, and his playmates the kids.</q><note place="foot">xi. 153.</note>
Observation of character had also taught him the fatal law that
the downward path in conduct, once entered on, is seldom retraced.
And this moral insight seems to come to Juvenal not from
any consciously held philosophic doctrine, nor from a settled
religious faith. His faith, like that of many of his time, was
probably of the vaguest. He scorns and detests the Eastern
worships which were pouring in like a flood, and carrying
away even loose women of the world.<note place="foot">vi. 510.</note> He pillories the
venal star-reader from the East and the Jewish hag who
interprets dreams. But he has also scant respect for classic
mythologies, and regrets the simple, long-gone age, before
heaven became crowded with divinities, before Saturn had
exchanged the diadem for the sickle, when Juno was still a
little maid,<note place="foot">xiii. 39.</note> when the terrors of Tartarus, the wheel, the
vulture, and the lash of the Furies had not taken the place of
a simple natural conscience.<note place="foot">xiii. 208.</note>
</p>

<p>
Juvenal’s moral tone then appears to unite the spirit of two
different ages. In some of his later Satires you catch the accent
of the age which was just opening when Juvenal began to write,
its growing sense of the equality and brotherhood of man, its
cosmopolitan morality, its ideals of spiritual culture. But
there are other elements in Juvenal, derived from old Roman
<pb n="65"/><anchor id="Pg65"/>prejudice and conventionality, or the result of personal temperament
and experience, which are quite as prominent. Juvenal
is an utter pessimist about his time, more extreme even than
Tacitus. His age, if we believe him, has attained the climax
of corruption, and posterity will never improve upon its
finished depravity.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 87, 147; x. 172 cf. Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Nat. Q.</hi> vii. 31; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8 sq.</note> His long practice as a declaimer had
given him a habit of exaggeration, and of aiming rather at
rhetorical brilliancy than truth. Whole passages in his
poems read like declamatory exercises turned into verse.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">e.g.</hi> the picture of Otho, ii. 99;
of Messalina, vi. 114; Lateranus, viii.
146; Sejanus, x. 56; Cicero, etc., viii.
231.</note>
A mere hanger-on of great society, one of the obscure crowd
who flocked to the rich man’s levée, and knowing the life of
the aristocracy only by remote observation or the voice of
scandalous gossip, he hardly deserves the implicit trust which
has been often accorded to his indictments of the society of
his day. His generalisations are of the most sweeping kind;
the colours are all dark. He thinks that the number of
decent people in his day is infinitesimally small. And yet
we may reasonably suspect, from his own evidence, that he
often generalised from single cases, that he treated abnormal
specimens as types. His moral ideals cannot have been a
monopoly of his own. In the palace of Nero in the worst
days, there was a pure Octavia as well as a voluptuous Poppaea.
The wife and mother of the gross Vitellius were women of spotless
fame.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 64; cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv.
19; iii. 16; D. Cass. 68. 5; Sen. <hi rend="italic">ad
Helv.</hi> xiv.</note> And in reading the fierce, unmeasured declamation
of Juvenal, we should never forget that he knew nothing personally
of Pliny or Tacitus, or of the circle which surrounded
Verginius Rufus and Spurinna. He has the same pessimist
theory of human declension which was held by Seneca and by
Tacitus. Every form of crime and sensuality has been rampant
since Rome lost the treasure of poverty, since the days when
silver shone only on the Roman’s arms.<note place="foot">Juv. xi. 109; iii. 152, 183.</note> Juvenal’s ideal lies
in that mythical past when a Curius, thrice consul, strode
homeward from the hills, mattock on shoulder, to a meal
of home-grown herbs and bacon served on earthenware.<note place="foot">xi. 78.</note>
It is the luxury of the conquered lands which has relaxed
the Roman fibre, which has introduced a false standard of
<pb n="66"/><anchor id="Pg66"/>life, degraded great houses, and flooded the city with an alien
crew of astrologers and grammarians, parasites and pimps.
</p>

<p>
Modern criticism has laboured hard to correct some of the
harsher judgments on the luxury and self-indulgence of the
period of the early Empire. Perhaps the scholarly reaction
against an indictment which had degenerated sometimes into
ignorant commonplace, may have been carried here and there
too far. The testimony of Tacitus is explicit that the luxury
of the table reached its height in the hundred years extending
from the battle of Actium to the accession of Vespasian.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi>
x. 3; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 22.</note> It
was a period of enormous fortunes spent in enormous waste.
Seneca or Pallas or Narcissus had accumulated wealth probably
three or four times greater than even the fortune of a Crassus
or a Lucullus. The long peace, the safety of the seas, and
the freedom of trade, had made Rome the entrepôt for the
peculiar products and the delicacies of every land from the
British Channel to the Ganges. The costly variety of these
foreign dainties was vulgarly paraded at every great dinner-party.
Palaces, extending almost over the area of a town, were
adorned with marbles from the quarries of Paros, Laconia,
Phrygia, or Numidia,<note place="foot">Statius, <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> v. 36; ii. 85.</note> with gilded ceilings and curious panels
changing with the courses of the banquet,<note place="foot">Petron. c. 60; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 9;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p. 67.</note> with hundreds of
tables of citrus-wood, resting on pillars of ivory, each costing
a moderate fortune, with priceless bronzes and masterpieces
of ancient plate. Nearly a million each year was drained
away to the remoter East, to purchase aromatics and jewels
for the elaborate toilette of the Roman lady.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> vi. 26; ix. 58; xii.
41. Cf. Friedl. iii. p. 80; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm.
St.</hi> ii. 53.</note> Hundreds
of household slaves, each with his minute special function,
anticipated every want, or ministered to every passion of their
masters. Every picturesque or sheltered site on the great lakes,
on the Anio, or the Alban hills, in the Laurentine pine forests,
or on the bays of Campania, was occupied by far-spreading
country seats. Lavish expenditure and luxurious state was
an imperious duty of rank, even without the precept of an
emperor.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxx. putabat sordidos
ac parcos esse quibus ratio impensarum
constaret, etc.</note> The senator who paid too low a rent, or rode
along the Appian or Flaminian Way with too scanty a train,
<pb n="67"/><anchor id="Pg67"/>became a marked man, and immediately lost caste.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 87, § 4; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> xxxv.;
Friedl. i. 196.</note> These
are the merest commonplace of the social history of the
time.
</p>

<p>
Yet in spite of the admitted facts of profusion and self-indulgence,
we may decline to accept Juvenal’s view of the
luxury of the age without some reserve. It is indeed no
apology for the sensuality of a section of the Roman aristocracy
in that day, to point out that the very same excesses made
their appearance two centuries before him, and that they will
be lamented both by Pagan and Christian moralists three
centuries after his death. But these facts suggest a doubt
whether the cancer of luxury had struck so deep as satirists
thought into the vitals of a society which remained for so
many centuries erect and strong. Before the end of the third
century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, began the long series of sumptuary laws which
Tiberius treated as so futile.<note place="foot">Liv. xxxiv. 1; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 53, 54.</note> The elder Pliny and Livy date
the introduction of luxurious furniture from the return of the
army in 188 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, after the campaign in Asia.<note place="foot">Liv. xxxiv. 6, 7; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 62,
162; Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. Hist.</hi> ii. 409.</note> Crassus, who left,
after the most prodigal expenditure, a fortune of £1,700,000,
had a town house which cost over £60,000.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. Hist.</hi> iii. 417.</note> The lavish
banquets of Lucullus were proverbial, and his villa at Misenum
was valued at £24,000. It was an age when more than
£1000 was given for a slave-cook or a pair of silver cups.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 418; cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> ix. 80, 81;
x. 23; Plut. <hi rend="italic">Lucull.</hi> c. 40; Macrob.
<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> iii. 13, § 1.</note>
Macrobius has preserved the menu of a pontifical banquet, at
which Julius Caesar and the Vestals were present, and which in
its costly variety surpassed, as he says, any epicurism of the
reign of Honorius.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> iii. 13, § 11.</note> And yet Ammianus and S. Jerome level
very much the same charges against the nobles of the fourth
century,<note place="foot">Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 117, § 8; Amm. Marc.
xiv. 6, 7; xxviii. 4.</note> which satire makes against the nobles of the first.
When we hear the same anathemas of luxury in the days of
Lucullus and in the reign of Honorius, separated by an interval
of more than five centuries, in which the Roman race stamped
itself on the page of history and on the face of nature by the
most splendid achievements of military virtue and of civilising
energy, we are inclined to question either the report of our
authorities, or the satirist’s interpretation of the social facts.
</p>

<pb n="68"/><anchor id="Pg68"/>

<p>
The good faith of the elder Pliny, of Seneca and Juvenal,
need not, indeed, be called in question. But the first two
were men who led by preference an almost ascetic life. The
satirist was a man whose culinary tastes were satisfied by the
kid and eggs and asparagus of his little farm at Tibur.<note place="foot">Juv. xi. 69.</note>
And the simple abstemious habits of the south, which are
largely the result of climate, tended to throw into more
startling contrast any indulgence of superfluous appetite. It
is true that the conquests which unlocked the hoarded
treasures of eastern monarchies, gave a great shock to the
hardy frugality and self-restraint of the old Roman character,
just as the stern simplicity of Spartan breeding was imperilled
by contact with the laxer life of the Hellespontine towns and the
wealth of the Persian court.<note place="foot">Thucyd. i. 95.</note> The Roman aristocracy were for
two centuries exposed to the same temptations as the treasures
of the Incas offered to Pizarro,<note place="foot">Prescott, <hi rend="italic">Conquest of Peru</hi>, i. 304.</note> or the treasures of the Moguls
to Clive. In the wild licence, which prevailed in certain circles
for more than a century, many a fortune and many a character
were wrecked. Yet the result may easily be exaggerated.
Extravagant luxury and self-indulgence is at all times only
possible to a comparatively small number. And luxury, after
all, is a relative term. The luxuries of one age often become
the necessities of the next. There are many articles of food or
dress, which free-trade and science have brought to the doors
of our cottagers, which would have incurred the censure of
the elder Pliny or of Seneca. There are aldermanic banquets
in New York or the city of London in our own day, which far
surpass, in costliness and variety, the banquets of Lucullus or
the pontiff’s feast described by Macrobius. The wealth of
Pallas, Narcissus, or Seneca, was only a fraction of many a
fortune accumulated in the last thirty years in the United
States.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 53 (Pallas); D. Cass.
60. 34 (Narcissus); Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 42;
D. Cass. 61. 10; cf. Duruy, v. p. 598.</note> The exaggerated idea of Roman riches and waste has
been further heightened by the colossal extravagance of the
worst emperors and a few of their boon companions and
imitators. But we are apt to forget that these were the
outbreaks of morbid and eccentric character, in which the last
feeble restraints were sapped and swept away by the sense of
<pb n="69"/><anchor id="Pg69"/>having at command the resources of a world. Nero is
expressly described by the historian as a lover of the impossible;<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 42.</note>
and both he and Caligula had floating before their
disordered imaginations the dream of astounding triumphs, even
over the most defiant forces and barriers of nature. There
was much in the extravagance of their courtiers and imitators,
springing from the same love of sensation and display. Rome
was a city of gossip, and the ambition to be talked about,
as the inventor of some new freak of prodigality, was probably
the only ambition of the blasé spendthrift of the time.
</p>

<p>
Yet, after all the deductions of scrupulous criticism, the
profound moral sense of Juvenal has laid bare and painted
with a realistic power, hardly equalled even by Tacitus,
an unhealthy temper in the upper classes, which was full of
peril. He has also revealed, alongside of this decline, a great
social change, we may even call it a crisis, which the historian,
generally more occupied with the great figures on the stage, is
apt to ignore. The decay in the morale and wealth of the
senatorial order, together with the growing power of a new
moneyed class, the rise to opulence of the freedman and the
petty trader, the invasion of Greek and Oriental influences,
and the perilous or hopeful emancipation, especially of women,
from old Roman conventionality, these are the great facts in
the social history of the first century which, under all his
rhetoric, stand out clearly to the eye of the careful student of
the satirist.
</p>

<p>
The famous piece, in which Juvenal describes an effeminate
Fabius or Lepidus, before the mutilated statues and smoke-stained
pedigree of his house, rattling the dice-box till the
dawn, or sunk in the stupor of debauch at the hour when his
ancestors were sounding their trumpets for the march,<note place="foot">Juv. viii. 10.</note> has, for
eighteen centuries, inspired many a homily on the vanity
of mere birth. Its moral is now a hackneyed one. But,
when the piece was written, it must have been a powerful
indictment. For the respect for long descent was still deep
in the true Roman, and was gratified by fabulous genealogies
to the end. Pliny extols Trajan for reserving for youths of
illustrious birth the honours due to their race.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 69.</note> Suetonius
recounts the twenty-eight consulships, five dictatorships, seven
<pb n="70"/><anchor id="Pg70"/>censorships, and many triumphs which were the glory of
the great Claudian house,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> i. Cf. the funeral
oration of Julius Caesar over his aunt,
quoted by Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> 6.</note> and the similar honours which
had been borne by the paternal ancestors of Nero.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, i.</note> Tacitus,
although not himself a man of old family, has a profound belief
in noble tradition, and sometimes speaks with an undisguised
scorn of a low alliance.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> vi. 33.</note> As the number of the <q>Trojugenae</q>
dwindled, the pride of the vanishing remnant probably grew
in proportion, and a clan like the Calpurnian reluctantly
yielded precedence even to Tiberius or Nero.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 48.</note> It is a sign
of the social tone that the manufacture of genealogies for the
new men, who came into prominence from the reign of
Vespasian, went on apace. A Trojan citizen in the days
of Apollonius traced himself to Priam.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 12.</note> Herodes Atticus
claimed descent from the heroes of Aegina,<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. 1.</note> just as some of the
Christian friends of S. Jerome confidently carried their pedigree
back to Aeneas or Agamemnon.<note place="foot">Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 4.</note> Juvenal would certainly
not have accepted such fables, but he was no leveller. He
had a firm belief in moral heredity and the value of tradition.
Plebeian as he was, he had, like Martial, his own old
Roman pride, which poured contempt on the upstarts who,
with the stains of servile birth or base trade upon them, were
crowding the benches of the knights. He would, indeed,
have applauded the <hi rend="italic">mot</hi> of Tiberius, that a distinguished man
was his own ancestor;<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 21, Curtius Rufus
videtur mihi ex se natus.</note> he recalls with pride that one humble
son of Arpinum had annihilated the hordes of the Cimbri, and
another had crushed the rising of Catiline.<note place="foot">Juv. viii. 285 sqq.</note> But he had the
true Roman reverence for the Curii, Fabii, and Scipios, and
would gladly salute any of their descendants who reproduced
their virtues.
</p>

<p>
It is a melancholy certainty that a great many of the senatorial
class in Juvenal’s day had fallen very low in all things
essential to the strength of a great caste. Their numbers had
long been dwindling,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 25.</note> owing to vicious celibacy or the cruel
proscriptions of the triumvirate and the four Claudian Caesars,
or from the unwillingness or inability of many to support the
<pb n="71"/><anchor id="Pg71"/>burdens of their rank. It was a rare thing in many great
houses to reach middle age.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 33, § 2; Juv. iv. 96.</note> Three hundred senators and two
thousand knights had fallen in the proscription of the second
triumvirate.<note place="foot">Appian, <hi rend="italic">B. C.</hi> iv. 5.</note> The massacre of old and young of both sexes,
which followed the fall of Sejanus, must have extinguished
many an ancient line; not a day passed without an execution.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 61, nullus a poena hominum
cessavit dies.</note>
Three hundred knights and thirty-five senators perished in the
reign of Claudius.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xxix.</note> Very few of the most ancient patrician
houses were left when Claudius revised the lists of the Senate,
and introduced a fresh element from Gaul.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 25.</note> Who can tell
the numbers of those who fell victims to the rage or greed
or suspicion of Caligula, Nero, and Domitian? The list must
have been enormously swelled by the awful year of the four
emperors. Vespasian found it necessary to recruit the ranks
of the aristocracy from Italy and the provinces.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> ix.; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55.</note>
</p>

<p>
At the same time, prodigality or confiscation had rendered
many of those who survived unable to maintain their rank, and
to bear the social and official burdens which, down to the end
of the Western Empire were rigorously imposed on the great
order. The games of the praetorship in the first century, as in
the fifth,<note place="foot">Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 78; Seeck, <hi rend="italic">Prol.</hi> xlvi.</note> constituted a tax which only a great fortune could
easily bear. Aristocratic poverty became common. As early
as the reign of Augustus, the emperor had found it politic to
subsidise many great families.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xli.</note> The same policy had been
continued by Tiberius, Nero, and Vespasian.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, x.; <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xvii.</note> Tiberius, indeed,
had scrutinised and discouraged some of these claims
on grounds which the treasury officials of every age would
applaud.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 37, 38.</note> A grandson of the great orator Hortensius once
made an appeal in the Senate for the means of supporting
the dignity of his name. He had received a grant from
Augustus to enable him to rear a family, and four sons were
now waiting at the doors of the Curia to second his prayer.
Hortensius, who was the great rival of Cicero, had possessed
immense wealth. He had many splendid villas, he used to
give dinners in his park, around which the deer would troop
<pb n="72"/><anchor id="Pg72"/>to the lute of a slave-Orpheus; he left 10,000 casks of old
Chian in his cellars. His mendicant and spiritless descendant
had to go away with a cold withering refusal from Tiberius,
softened by a contemptuous dole to his sons. The revision
of the senatorial roll by Claudius in 48 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, revealed a portentous
disappearance of old houses of the Republic, and the
gaps had to be filled up from the provinces in the teeth of
aristocratic exclusiveness.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 25; D. Cass. lx. 29.
The last revision of the Senate was in
the reign of Augustus; D. Cass. lv.
13.</note> Among the boon companions of
Nero there must have been many loaded with debt, like
Otho and Vitellius. The Corvinus in Juvenal who is keeping
sheep on a Laurentine farm, and his probable kinsman who
obtained a subsidy from Nero, the Fabii and Mamerci
who were dancing and playing the harlequin on the comic
stage, or selling their blood in the arena, must represent
many a wreck of the great houses of the Republic.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 34; Juv. i. 107.</note> Among
the motley crowd who swarm in the hall of the great patron
to receive the morning dole, the descendants of houses
coeval with the Roman State are pushed aside by the
freedmen from the Euphrates.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 103.</note> But aristocratic poverty
knew no lower depth of degradation than in the hungry
adulation which it offered to the heirless rich. Captation
became a regular profession in a society where trade, industry,
and even professional skill, were treated as degrading to the
men of gentle blood.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> c. 116, 124; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
ii. 20; Juv. i. 37; iii. 31.</note> It is characteristic of Juvenal that he
places on the same level the legacy-hunter, who would stoop
to any menial service or vicious compliance, with the honest
tradesfolk, in whose ranks, if we may judge by their funerary
inscriptions, was to be found, perhaps, the wholesomest moral
tone in the society of the early Empire.
</p>

<p>
In a satire written after Domitian’s death,<note place="foot">Juv. iv.; i. 27.</note> Juvenal has
described a scene of fatuous adulation which, if not true in
fact, is only too true to the character of the time. A huge
mullet, too large for any private table, had been caught in a
bay of the Adriatic. Its captor hastens through winter storms
to lay his spoil at the emperor’s feet. The kitchen of the
Alban palace had no dish large enough for such a monster, and
<pb n="73"/><anchor id="Pg73"/>a council of trembling senators is hastily summoned to consult
on the emergency. Thither came the gentle Crispus, that
Acilius, whose son was to be the victim of the despot’s
jealousy, Rubrius tainted with a nameless crime, the bloated
Montanus, and Crispinus, once an Egyptian slave, now a
vulgar exquisite, reeking with unguents. There, too, was the
informer whose whisper stabbed like a stiletto, the lustful,
blind Catullus, and the arch flatterer Veiento, who had
revelled at the Gargantuan feasts of Nero from noon till
midnight. These are worthy brethren of the assembly who
stabbed Proculus to death with their stiles at the nod of the
freedman of Caligula,<note place="foot">D. Cass. lix. 26.</note> and led Nero home in triumphal procession
after his mother’s murder.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many things had contributed to the degradation of the
senatorial character. The dark and tortuous policy of
Tiberius tended, indeed, to absolutism; yet he still maintained
a tone of deference to the Senate, and sometimes, with cold
good sense, repelled a too eager adulation.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> lxvii.</note> But, in the reigns
of Caligula and Nero, the great order had to submit to the
deepest personal degradation, and were tempted, or compelled
by their masters to violate every instinct of Roman dignity.
The wild epileptic frenzy of Caligula, who spared not the
virtue of his sisters,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxiii. xxiv.; cf. L. comitiali
morbo vexatus, which explains much
to a medical man.</note> as he boasted of his own incestuous
birth,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxiii.</note> who claimed divine honours,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxii.; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, i. 20.</note> temples, and costly
sacrifices, who, as another Endymion, called the Moon to his
embraces, who dreamt of obliterating the memory of Homer
and Virgil and Livy, was not likely to spare the remnant of
self-respect still left in his nobles.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxxiv. xxxv. vetera
familiarum insignia nobilissimo cuique
ademit; xxii.</note> He gave an immense
impetus to the rage for singing, dancing, and acting,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> liv. lv. quorum vero studio
teneretur, omnibus ad insaniam favit.</note> for
chariot-driving and fighting in the arena, not unknown before,
which Juvenal and Tacitus brand as the most flagrant sign of
degenerate morals. There was indeed a great conflict of
sentiment under the early Empire as to some of these arts.
Julius Caesar had encouraged or permitted Roman senators
and knights to fight in the gladiatorial combats, and a Laberius
<pb n="74"/><anchor id="Pg74"/>to act in his own play.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> xxxix.</note> But a decree of the Senate, not long
afterwards, had placed a ban on these exhibitions by men of
noble rank.<note place="foot">D. Cass. xlviii. 43.</note> Tiberius, who was, beyond anything, a haughty
aristocrat, at a later date intervened to save the dignity of
the order.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tiberius</hi>, xxxv.</note> But the rage of the rabble for these spectacles
had undoubtedly caught many in the ranks of the upper
class. And Caligula and Nero<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xviii. nec ullis nisi ex
senatorio ordine aurigantibus; D.
Cass. 59. 10, 13, Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xii.</note> found, only too easily, youths
of birth and breeding, but ruined fortune, who were ready to
exhibit themselves for a welcome <hi rend="italic">douceur</hi>, or to gain the
favour of the prince, or even to bring down the applause
of the crowded benches of the amphitheatre or the circus.
Yet the old Roman feeling must have been very persistent,
when a man like Domitian, who posed as a puritan, found
it politic to remove from the Senate one who had disgraced
his order by dancing in the pantomime, and even
laid his interdict on all public theatrical performances.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> viii. vii.</note>
The revels and massacres and wild debauchery of Nero did
not so much to hasten his destruction as his singing his
catches to the lute, or appearing in the parts of the incestuous
Canace and the matricide Orestes.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xx. xxi.</note> From every part of the
world, in all the literature of the time, there is a chorus of
astounded indignation against the prince who could stoop to
pit himself against Greek players and singers at Delphi or
Olympia. Juvenal has been reproached for putting the chariot-driving
of Damasippus in the same category with the Verrine
plunder of provinces.<note place="foot">Juv. viii. 89, 147.</note> He is really the exponent of old
Roman sentiment. And it may be doubted whether, from the
Roman point of view, Juvenal might not justify himself to
his critics. Even in our own emancipated age, we might be
pardoned for feeling a shock if an English prime minister rode
his own horse at the Derby, or appeared in a risky part on the
boards of the Gaiety. And the collective sense of senatorial
self-respect was too precious to a Roman patriot and moralist,
to be flung away for mere love of sport, or in a fit of spurious
artistic enthusiasm. Nero, and in an even lower fashion
Caligula, were rebels against old Roman conventional restraints,
<pb n="75"/><anchor id="Pg75"/>and it is possible that some of the hideous tales about them,
which were spread in the <q>circuli,</q> may have been the vengeance
of Roman pride on shameless social revolutionaries, who
paraded their contempt for old-fashioned dignity and for social
tradition. Nero was never so happy as when he was deafened
with applause, and smothered with roses at the Greek festivals.
He had once predicted for him a monarchy in those regions of
the East,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xl.; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Krause, <hi rend="italic">De
Sueton. Fontibus</hi>, pp. 57, 80; Peter,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 69.</note> where he would have escaped from the tradition of
old Roman puritanism, and combined all the ingenious sensuality
of Syria with the doubtful artistic taste of a decadent
Hellenism. The cold haughty refinement of senatorial circles
of the old régime, and the rude honest virtue of the plebeian
soldiery,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 67.</note> rightly mistrusted this false sensational artist on the
throne of the world.
</p>

<p>
Art, divorced from moral ideals, may become a dangerous
thing. The emperor might spend the morning with his
favourites in patching up lilting verses which would run well
to the lute.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 16; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, lii.,
where Suetonius distinctly says that
some of Nero’s verses, which he had
seen, bore all the marks of originality.
Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 39; Macé,
<hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 127; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p.
248.</note> But the scene soon changed to a revel, where
the roses and music hardly veiled the grossness of excess. The
<q>noctes Neronis</q> made many a debauchee and scattered many
a senatorial fortune.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxvii.</note> And amid all this elaborate luxury and
splendour of indulgence, there was a strange return to the
naturalism of vice and mere blackguardism. A Messalina or
a Nero or a Petronius developed a curious taste for the low
life that reeks and festers in the taverns and in the stews.
Bohemianism for a time became the fashion.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxvi.; cf. Juv. vi. 115.</note> Its very grossness
was a stimulant to appetites jaded with every diabolical
refinement of vicious ingenuity. The distinguished dinner
party, with the emperor at their head, sallied forth to see how
the people were living in the slums. Many a scene from these
midnight rambles has probably been preserved in the tainted,
yet brilliant, pages of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>. Petronius had probably
often plunged with Nero after night-fall into those low dens,
where slave minions and sailors and the obscene priests of the
great Mother were roistering together, or sunk in the slumber
<pb n="76"/><anchor id="Pg76"/>of debauch.<note place="foot">Juv. viii. 172.</note> These elegant aristocrats found their sport in
rudely assaulting quiet citizens returning from dinner, or
plundering some poor huckster’s stall in the Suburra, or insulting
a lady in her chair. In the fierce faction fights of the
theatre, where stones and benches were flying, the Emperor
had once the distinction of breaking a praetor’s head.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxvi.</note> It was
nobles trained in this school, experts in vice, but with no
nerve for arms, who encumbered the train of Otho on his
march to the sanguinary conflict on the Po.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 88.</note>
</p>

<p>
The demoralisation of a section of the upper class under the
bad emperors must have certainly involved the degradation of
many women. And one of the most brilliant and famous of
Juvenal’s Satires is devoted to this unsavoury subject. The
<q>Legend of Bad Women</q> is a graphic picture, and yet it
suffers from a defect which spoils much of Juvenal’s work.
Full of realistic power, with an undoubted foundation of truth,
it is too vehement and sweeping in its censures to gain full
credence. It is also strangely wanting in balance and due order
of idea.<note place="foot">See some admirable criticism in
Nettleship’s <hi rend="italic">Lectures and Essays</hi>, 2nd
series, p. 141; cf. Munding, <hi rend="italic">Über die
Sat. des Juv.</hi> p. 7.</note> The problem of marriage is illustrated by a series
of sketches of female manners, which are very disconnected,
and, indeed, sometimes inconsistent. Thorough depravity,
superstition, and ignorant devotion, interest in literature and
public affairs, love of gymnastic and decided opinions on
Virgil—in fact, vices, innocent hobbies, and laudable tastes are
all thrown together in a confused indictment. The bohemian
man of letters had heard many a scandal about great ladies,
some of them true, others distorted and exaggerated by
prurient gossip, after passing through a hundred tainted
imaginations. In his own modest class, female morality, as
we may infer from the Inscriptions and other sources, was
probably as high as it ever was, as high as the average
morality of any age.<note place="foot">Duruy, v. 673; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi>
ii. 233 sqq.</note> There were aristocratic families, too,
where the women were as pure as Lucretia or Cornelia, or any
matron of the olden days.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 19; iii. 16; iii. 3;
Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> xiv. xix.; D. Cass.
lxviii. 5 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note> The ideal of purity, both in men
and women, in some circles was actually rising. In the families
of Seneca, of Tacitus, of Pliny and Plutarch, there were, not
<pb n="77"/><anchor id="Pg77"/>only the most spotless and high minded women, there were
also men with a rare conception of temperance and mutual
love, of reverence for a pure wedlock, to which S. Jerome and
S. Augustine would have given their benediction. Even Ovid,
that <q>debauchee of the imagination,</q> writes to his wife, from
his exile in the Scythian wilds, in the accents of the purest
affection.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Trist.</hi> iii. 3, 15—

<lg>
<l>Omnia cum subeant, vincis tamen omnia, conjux;</l>
<l>Et plus in nostro pectore parte tenes.</l>
<l>Te loquor absentem, te vox mea nominat unam:</l>
<l>Nulla venit sine te nox mihi, nulla dies.</l>
</lg></note> And, amid all the lubricity of his pictures of
gallantry, he has not lost the ideal of a virgin heart, which
repels and disarms the libertine by the spell of an impregnable
purity.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Amor.</hi> iii. 4, 3; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ars Am.</hi>
ii. 599, iii. 440, 613, Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées
Morales</hi>, ii. 124.</note> Plutarch’s ideal of marriage, at once severe
and tender, would have satisfied S. Paul.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Uxor.</hi> x.; <hi rend="italic">Conj.
Praec.</hi> iv. xliv. xlvii.</note> Favorinus, the
friend and contemporary of Plutarch, thought it not beneath
the dignity of philosophic eloquence to urge on mothers
the duty of suckling and personally caring for their infants.<note place="foot">A. Gell. xii. 1.</note>
Seneca and Musonius, who lived through the reign of Nero,
are equally peremptory in demanding a like continence
from men and from women. And Musonius severely condemns
concubinage and vagrant amours of every kind, the
man guilty of seduction sins not only against another, but
against his own soul.<note place="foot">Denis, ii. 134; Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Die Phil. der
Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p. 660.</note> Dion Chrysostom was probably the first
of the ancients to raise a clear voice against the traffic in frail
beauty which has gone on pitilessly from age to age. Nothing
could exceed the vehemence with which he assails an evil
which he regards as not only dishonouring to human nature,
but charged with the poison of far spreading corruption.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. 133.</note>
Juvenal’s ideal of purity, therefore, is not peculiar to himself.
The great world was bad enough, but there was another world
beside that whose infamy Juvenal has immortalised.
</p>

<p>
It is also to be observed that Juvenal seems to be quite
as much under the influence of old Roman conventionality as of
permanent moral ideals. He condemns eccentricities, or mere
harmless aberrations from old-fashioned rules of propriety, as
ruthlessly as he punishes lust and crime. The blue-stocking
who is a purist in style, and who balances, with deafening
<pb n="78"/><anchor id="Pg78"/>volubility, the merits of Homer and Virgil,<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 436—

<lg>
<l>Committit vates et comparat; inde Maronem,</l>
<l>Atque alia parte in trutina suspendit Homerum.</l>
<l>Cedunt grammatici, vincuntur rhetores—</l>
</lg></note> the eager gossip
who has the very freshest news from Thrace or Parthia, or the
latest secret of a tainted family,<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 400 sqq.</note> the virago who, with an
intolerable pride of virtue, plays the household tyrant and
delivers curtain lectures to her lord,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 268.</note> seem to be almost as
detestable in Juvenal’s eyes as the doubtful person who has
had eight husbands in five years, or one who elopes with an
ugly gladiator,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 108, 60.</note> or tosses off two pints before dinner.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 427.</note> We
may share his disgust for the great ladies who fought in the
arena and wrestled in the ring,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 252.</note> or who order their poor tire-women
to be flogged for deranging a curl in the towering
architecture of their hair.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 493.</note> But we cannot feel all his contempt
for the poor penitent devotee of Isis who broke the ice to
plunge thrice in the Tiber on a winter morning, and crawled
on bleeding knees over the Campus Martius, or brought a phial
of water from the Nile to sprinkle in the fane of the goddess.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 528.</note>
Even lust, grossness, and cruelty, even poisoning and abortion,
seem to lose some of their blackness when they are compared
with an innocent literary vanity, or a pathetic eagerness to
read the future or to soothe the pangs of a guilty conscience.
</p>

<p>
The truth is that Juvenal is as much shocked by the <q>new
woman</q> as he is by the vicious woman. He did not understand,
or he could not acquiesce in the great movement for the
emancipation of women, which had set in long before his time,
and which, like all such movements, brought evil with it as
well as good. There is perhaps nothing more striking in
the social history of Rome than the inveterate conservatism
of Roman sentiment in the face of accomplished change.
Such moral rigidity is almost necessarily prone to pessimism.
The Golden Age lies in the past; the onward sweep of
society seems to be always moving towards the abyss.
The ideal past of the Roman woman lay more than two
centuries and a half behind the time when Juvenal was
born. The old Roman matron was, by legal theory, in the
power of her husband, yet assured by religion and sentiment a
dignified position in the family, and treated with profound, if
somewhat cold, respect; she was busied with household cares,
<pb n="79"/><anchor id="Pg79"/>and wanting in the lighter graces and charms, austere, self-contained,
and self-controlled. But this severe ideal had
begun to fade even in the days of the elder Cato.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. Hist.</hi> ii. 408 (Tr.).</note> And there
is hardly a fault or vice attributed by Juvenal to the women
of Domitian’s reign, which may not find parallel in the nine or
ten generations before Juvenal penned his great indictment
against the womanhood of his age. The Roman lady’s irritable
pride of birth is at least as old as the rivalry of the two Fabiae
in the fourth century.<note place="foot">Liv. vi. 34.</note> The elder Cato dreaded a rich wife
as much as Juvenal,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cato Maj.</hi> c. xx.; Juv. vi.
165, 460.</note> and satirised as bitterly the pride and
gossip and luxury of the women of his time. Their love of
gems and gold ornaments and many-coloured robes and richly
adorned carriages, is attested by Plautus and the impotent legislation
of C. Oppius.<note place="foot">Val. Max. ii. 1, 5; Liv. xxxiv. 1, 3;
Marq. i. p. 62.</note> Divorce and ghastly crime in the noblest
families were becoming common in the days of the Second Punic
War. About the same time began that emancipation of
women from the jealous restraints of Roman law, which was to
be carried further in the Antonine age.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. Hist.</hi> ii. 408.</note> The strict forms of
marriage, which placed the wife in the power of her husband,
fell more and more into desuetude. Women attained more
absolute control over their property, and so much capital
became concentrated in their hands that, about the middle of
the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, the Voconian law was passed to prohibit
bequests to them, with the usual futile result of such
legislation.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">in Verr.</hi> i. 42, 107.</note> Yet the old ideal of the industrious housewife
never died out, and Roman epitaphs for ages record that the
model matron was a wool-worker and a keeper at home. A
senator of the reign of Honorius praises his daughter for the same
homely virtues.<note place="foot">Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 67; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi>
lxiv.; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2677, 4629, 4629,
lanifica, pia, pudica, casta, domiseda.</note> But from the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> the education
of the Roman girl of the higher classes underwent a great
change.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> iii. 14, 11.</note> Dancing, music, and the higher accomplishments
were no longer under a ban, although they were still suspected
by people of the old-fashioned school. Boys and girls received
the same training from the grammarian, and read their Homer
and Ennius together.<note place="foot">Friedl. i. 312; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi>
ii. 240.</note> There were women in the time of
<pb n="80"/><anchor id="Pg80"/>Lucretius, as in the time of Juvenal, who interlarded their
conversation with Greek phrases.<note place="foot">Lucr. iv. 1160; Juv. vi. 192.</note> Cornelia, the wife of
Pompey, was trained in literature and mathematics, and even
had some tincture of philosophy.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Pomp.</hi> lv.</note> The daughter of Atticus,
who became the wife of Agrippa, was placed under the tuition
of a freedman, who, as too often happened, seems to have
abused his trust.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Gram. Ill.</hi> 16.</note> Even in the gay circle of Ovid, there
were learned ladies, or ladies who wished to be thought so.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Ars Am.</hi> ii. 282.</note>
Even Martial reckons culture among the charms of a woman.
Seneca maintained that women have an equal capacity for cultivation
with men.<note place="foot">Mart. xii. 98, 3; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi>
xvii.; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xvi.</note> Thus the blue-stocking of Juvenal, for whom
he has so much contempt, had many an ancestress for three
centuries, as she will have many a daughter till the end of the
Western Empire.<note place="foot">Claud. <hi rend="italic">Laus Serenae</hi>, 146.</note> Even in philosophy, usually the last study
to attract the female mind, Roman ladies were asserting
an equal interest. Great ladies of the Augustan court, even
the empress herself, had their philosophic directors,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> 4.</note> and
the fashion perhaps became still more general under M.
Aurelius. Epictetus had met ladies who were enthusiastic
admirers of the Platonic Utopia, but the philosopher rather
slyly attributes their enthusiasm to the absence of rigorous
conjugal relations in the Ideal Society.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> liii.</note> Even in the field of
authorship, women were claiming equal rights. The <hi rend="italic">Memoirs of
Agrippina</hi> was one of the authorities of Tacitus.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 53; cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi>
vii. 8, 46.</note> The poems of
Sulpicia, mentioned by Martial,<note place="foot">Mart. x. 35; vii. 69.</note> were read in Gaul in the days
of Sidonius.<note place="foot">Sid. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> ix. 261.</note> Greek verses, of some merit in spite of a pedantic
affectation, by Balbilla, a friend of the wife of Hadrian, can
still be read on the Colossus of Memnon.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.G.</hi> 4725-31.</note> Calpurnia, the wife
of Pliny, may not have been an author; but she shared all
Pliny’s literary tastes; she set his poems to music, and gave
him the admiration of a good wife, if not of an impartial critic.
</p>

<p>
Juvenal feels as much scorn for the woman who is interested
in public affairs and the events on the frontier,<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 403; cf. 434.</note> as he
feels for the woman who presumes to balance the merits of
Virgil and Homer. And here he is once more at war with a
<pb n="81"/><anchor id="Pg81"/>great movement towards the equality of the sexes. From the
days of Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, to the days of
Placidia, the sister of Honorius, Roman women exercised, from
time to time, a powerful, and not always wholesome, influence
on public affairs. The politic Augustus discussed high matters
of state with Livia.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> lxxxiv.</note> The reign of Claudius was a reign of
women and freedmen. Tacitus records, with a certain distaste
for the innovation, that Agrippina sat enthroned beside Claudius
on a lofty tribunal, to receive the homage of the captive Caractacus.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 37, novum sane et
moribus veterum insolitum, feminam
signis Romanis praesidere.</note>
Nero emancipated himself from the grasping ambition
of his mother only by a ghastly crime. The influence of
Caenis on Vespasian in his later days tarnished his fame.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxvi. 14; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi>
xvi.; Krause, <hi rend="italic">De Suet. Fontibus</hi>, p. 75.</note>
The influence of women in provincial administration was also
becoming a serious force. In the reign of Tiberius, Caecina
Severus, with the weight of forty years’ experience of camps, in
a speech before the Senate, denounced the new-fangled custom
of the wives of generals and governors accompanying them
abroad, attending reviews of troops, mingling freely with the
soldiers, and taking an active part in business, which was not
always favourable to pure administration.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 33; cf. i. 64; i. 69,
sed femina [<hi rend="italic">i.e.</hi> Agrippina] ingens animi
munia ducis per eos dies induit, etc.</note> In the inscriptions
of the first and second centuries, women appear in a more
wholesome character as <q>mothers of the camp,</q> or patronesses
of municipal towns and corporations.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6000, 4036, 5158, 4643,
5134, 3774, 2417, 4055, 4056, 7207,
3815.</note> They have statues dedicated
to them for liberality in erecting porticoes or adorning
theatres or providing civic games or feasts.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3738, 3773, 6992.</note> And on one of
these tablets we read of a <hi rend="italic">Curia mulierum</hi> at Lanuvium.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3740.</note>
We are reminded of the <q>chapter of matrons</q> who visited
Agrippina with their censure,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Galba</hi>, v.</note> and another female senate, under
Elagabalus, which dealt with minute questions of precedence
and graded etiquette.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Heliogab.</hi> iv.; cf. Lamprid.
<hi rend="italic">Aurelian.</hi> xlix.</note> On the walls of Pompeii female admirers
posted up their election placards in support of their
favourite candidates.<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi> (Kelsey Tr.), p. 479.</note> Thus Juvenal was fighting a lost battle,
lost long before he wrote. For good or evil, women in the
first and second centuries were making themselves a power.
</p>

<pb n="82"/><anchor id="Pg82"/>

<p>
Although he was probably a very light believer in the old
mythology,<note place="foot">Juv. ii. 31; iv. 34; xiii. 38; vi.
394; vii. 194.</note> and treated its greatest figures with scant respect,
Juvenal had all the old Roman prejudice against those eastern
worships which captivated so many women of his day. And, here
again, the satirist is assailing a movement which had set in long
before he wrote, and which was destined to gain immense impetus
and popularity in the two following centuries. The eunuch
priests of the Great Mother, with their cymbals and Phrygian
tiaras, had appeared in Italy in the last years of the Hannibalic
War.<note place="foot">Liv. xxix. 14.</note> The early years of the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> were convulsed
by the scandals and horrors of the Dionysiac orgies,
which fell on Rome like a pestilence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxxix. 8; cf. Lafaye, <hi rend="italic">Culte des
Div. d’Alexandrie</hi>, c. iii.</note> The purity of women
and the peace of families were in serious danger, till the
mischief was stamped out in blood. The worship of Isis
found its way into the capital at least as early as Sulla, and
defied the hesitating exclusion of Augustus.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. 817; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi>
xciii.; D. Cass. liii. 2.</note> At this distance,
we can see the <hi rend="italic">raison d’être</hi> of what the satirist regarded
as religious aberrations, the full treatment of which must
be reserved for another chapter. The world was in the
throes of a religious revolution, and eagerly in quest of some
fresh vision of the Divine, from whatever quarter it might
dawn. The cults of the East seemed to satisfy cravings and
emotions, which found no resting-place in the national religion.
Their ritual appealed to the senses and imagination, while their
mysteries seemed to promise a revelation of God and immortality.
Their strange mixture of the sensuous and the ascetic
was specially adapted to fascinate weak women who had deeply
sinned, and yet occasionally longed to repent. The repentance
indeed was often shallow enough; the fasting and mortification
were compatible with very light morals.<note place="foot">Catull. x. 26; Tibull. i. 3, 23; cf.
Juv. xiii. 93.</note> There were the gravest
moral abuses connected with such worships as that of Magna
Mater. It is well known that the temples of Isis often
became places of assignation and guilty intrigue.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Ars Am.</hi> i. 77.</note> An infatuated
Roman lady in the reign of Tiberius had been
seduced by her lover in the pretended guise of the god
Anubis.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 347.</note> The Chaldaean seer or the Jewish hag might often
<pb n="83"/><anchor id="Pg83"/>arouse dangerous hopes, or fan a guilty passion by casting
a horoscope or reading a dream.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 547.</note> But Juvenal’s scorn seems
to fall quite as heavily on the innocent votary who was striving
to appease a burdened conscience, as on one who made her
superstition a screen for vice.
</p>

<p>
In spite of the political extinction of the Jewish race, its
numbers and influence grew in Italy. The very destruction
of the Holy Place and the external symbols of Jewish worship
threw a more impressive air of mystery around the dogmas
of the Jewish faith, of which even the most cultivated Romans
had only vague conceptions.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> v. 2, 4; Juv. xiv. 97.</note> The Jews, from the time of
the first Caesar, had worked their way into every class of
society.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> 42 (in Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>,
vi. 11), victi victoribus leges dederunt.</note> A Jewish prince had inspired Caligula with an
oriental ideal of monarchy.<note place="foot">Cf. Meriv. vi. 6.</note> There were adherents of Judaism
in the household of the great freedmen of Claudius, and their
growing influence and turbulence compelled that emperor to
expel the race from the capital.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xxv.</note> The worldly, pleasure-loving
Poppaea had, perhaps, yielded to the mysterious charm of the
religion of Moses.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 22; Duruy, iv. 505.</note> But it was under the Flavians, who had
such close associations with Judaea, that Jewish influences
made themselves most felt. And in the reign of Domitian,
two members of the imperial house, along with many others,
suffered for following the Jewish mode of life.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xv.; D. Cass. lxvii.
14; Ren. <hi rend="italic">Les Év.</hi> p. 228.</note> Their crime
is also described as <q>atheism,</q> and Clemens is, in the old
Roman spirit, said to have been a man of the most <q>contemptible
inactivity.</q> In truth, the <q>Jewish life</q> was a
description which might cover many shades of belief and
practice in religion, including Christianity itself. The secret
worship of a dim, mysterious Power, Who was honoured
by no imposing rites, a spirit of detachment and quietism,
which shrank from games and spectacles and the scenes of
fashion, and nursed the dream of a coming kingdom which
was not of this world, excited the suspicion and contempt
of the coarse, strenuous Roman nature. Yet, in the gloom
and deep corruption of that sombre time, such a life of
retreat and renunciation had a strange charm for naturally
<pb n="84"/><anchor id="Pg84"/>pious souls, especially among women. There were indeed
many degrees of conformity to the religion of Palestine.
While some were attracted by its more spiritual side, others
confined themselves to an observance of the Sabbath, which
became very common in some quarters of Rome under the
Empire. The children, as Juvenal tells us, were sometimes
trained to a complete conformity to the law of Moses.<note place="foot">Juv. xiv. 96; vi. 544; iii. 15;
Ren. <hi rend="italic">Les Év.</hi> p. 234.</note>
But Juvenal is chiefly thinking of the mendicant population
from Palestine who swarmed in the neighbourhood of the
Porta Capena and the grove of the Muses, practising all the
arts which have appealed in all ages to superstitious women.
Thus the Judaism of the times of Nero or Domitian might
cover anything from the cunning of the gipsy fortune-teller
to the sad, dreaming quietism of Pomponia Graecina.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet it must be admitted that, although Juvenal, in his
attacks on women, has mixed up very real vice with superstition
and mere innocent eccentricity, or the explosive energy
of a new freedom, the real vices of many women of his time
are a melancholy fact. The Messalinas and Poppaeas had
many imitators and companions in their own class. It is
true that even the licentious fancy of Ovid and Martial
generally spares the character of the unmarried girl. She was,
in the darkest times, as a rule, carefully guarded from the
worst corruptions of the spectacles,<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. p. 332; cf. Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 24.</note> or from the reckless
advances of the hardened libertine, although an intrigue with a
tutor was not unknown.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ill. Gram.</hi> xvi.</note> Her marriage was arranged often
in mere childhood, seldom later than her seventeenth year.
A girl was rarely betrothed after nineteen.<note place="foot">Friedl. i. 314; <hi rend="italic">Inscr. Or.</hi> 2656,
2668, 4803.</note> Her temptations
and danger often began on her wedding-day. That there was
a high ideal of pure and happy marriage, even in the times
of the greatest licence, we know from Pliny and Plutarch,
and from Martial himself.<note place="foot">Mart. iv. 13—

<lg>
<l>Diligat illa senem quondam: sed et ipsa marito,</l>
<l>Tunc quoque cum fuerit, non videatur anus.</l>
</lg>

Plut. <hi rend="italic">Conj. Praec.</hi> xliv. xxxiv.; Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 19; vi. 4; vii. 5.</note> But there were serious perils
before the child-bride, when she was launched upon the great
world of Roman society. A marriage of convenience with
some member of a tainted race, <hi rend="italic">blasé</hi> with precocious and
<pb n="85"/><anchor id="Pg85"/>unnatural indulgence, and ready to concede the conjugal
liberty which he claimed, was a perilous trial to virtue. The
bonds of old Roman marriage had, for ages, been greatly
relaxed, and the Roman lady of independent fortune and
vigorous, highly trained intellect, could easily find consolation
for marital neglect. From Seneca to S. Jerome, the foppish
procurator of the great lady was a dangerous and suspected
person,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> xiii. de Matrimonio,
formosus assecla et procurator calamistratus,
etc., sub quibus nominibus adulteri
delitescunt; cf. S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 54,
§ 13. S. Jerome is evidently imitating
Seneca; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 639, Mart. v.
61.</note> and not always without good cause. Surrounded by an
army of slaves and the other obsequious dependents of a great
house, treated with profound deference, and saluted with the
pompous titles of <hi rend="italic">domina</hi> and <hi rend="italic">regina</hi>, the great lady’s lightest
caprice became law.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 460; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> 51.</note> Costly jewels and the rarest luxuries of the
toilet poured in upon her from regions which were only visited
by the captains of Red Sea merchantmen, or by some Pythagorean
ascetic seeking the fountains of the wisdom of the East.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iii. 35, Luc.
<hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> 44.</note>
</p>

<p>
The political life of Rome had been extinguished by a
jealous despotism, but social life in the higher ranks was never
so intense and so seductive, and women had their full share in
it. Ladies dined out regularly with their husbands, even at
the emperor’s table,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 81, erat Othoni celebre
convivium primoribus feminis virisque.
D. Cass. lx. 7.</note> and they were liable to be assailed by
the artistic wiles of which Ovid taught the secret, or by the
brutal advances of the lawless Caligula.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxxvi.</note> It was a time when
people loved to meet anywhere, under the trees of the Campus
Martius, in the colonnades of the theatre, or round the
seats of the public squares. Everywhere were to be seen
those groups which spared no reputation, not even the emperor’s.
And behind the chair of the young matron often
hovered the dangerous exquisite, who could hum in a whisper
the latest suggestive song from Alexandria or Gades,<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Ars Am.</hi> i. 67, Friedl. i. 281.</note> who
knew the pedigree of every racehorse and the secret of every
intrigue. It is at such scenes that Tacitus is probably
glancing when he says that in Germany no one makes a jest
of vice, or calls the art of corruption the fashion of the world;<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 19, nec corrumpere et
corrumpi saeculum vocatur.</note>
chastity is not sapped by the seductions of the spectacles.
<pb n="86"/><anchor id="Pg86"/>Augustus had, indeed, set apart the upper seats for women in
the theatre and amphitheatre,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xliv.</note> but on the benches of the circus
the sexes freely mingled. It was there, while the factions of the
red and blue were shouting themselves hoarse, Ovid pointed
out to his pupil in gallantry, that he had his fairest chance of
making a dangerous impression.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Ars Am.</hi> i. 139—

<lg>
<l>Proximus a domina, nullo prohibente, sedeto.</l>
</lg></note> Yet even Ovid is half inclined
to be shocked at the scenes on the stage which were
witnessed by women and young boys.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Trist.</hi> ii. 503—

<lg>
<l>Nec satis incestis temerari vocibus aures:</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Adsuescunt oculi multa pudenda pati.</l>
</lg>

Cf. 515.</note> The foulest tales of
the old mythology, the loves of Pasiphae or the loves of Leda,
were enacted to the life, or told with a nakedness of language,
compared with which even Martial might seem chaste.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 86 says of his poems—

<lg>
<l>Non sunt haec mimis improbiora: lege.</l>
</lg></note> Not
less degrading were the gladiatorial shows, so lavishly provided
by Augustus and Trajan, as well as by Caligula and Domitian,
at which the Vestals had a place of honour.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xliv.</note> It is little
wonder that women accustomed to take pleasure in the sufferings
and death of brave men, should be capable of condemning
their poor slave women to torture or the lash for a sullen look,
or a half-heard murmur. The grossness with which Juvenal
describes the effect of the stage on the morals of women savours
of the Suburra.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 62.</note> But of the poisonous character of these performances
there can be no doubt. And actors, musicians, and
gladiators became a danger to the peace of households, as well
as to the peace of the streets. The artistes of the pantomime
were sternly suppressed both by Tiberius and Domitian, and
not without good cause.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> vii.; <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> xxxiv.</note> One famous dancer had the fatal
honour of captivating Messalina.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lx. 22, 28.</note> The empress of Domitian
was divorced for her love of Paris.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> iii.; D. Cass. lxvii. 3.</note> And the scandals
which darkened the fame of the younger Faustina, and
impeached the legitimacy of Commodus, even if they were
false, must have rested on a certain ground of probability.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Anton.</hi> xix.</note>
It is melancholy to hear that M. Aurelius had to restrain
the excesses of Roman matrons even under the reign of the
philosophers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxiii. mores matronarum conposuit
diffluentes, etc.</note> To all these perils must be added the allurements
of household slavery. While a Musonius or a Seneca
<pb n="87"/><anchor id="Pg87"/>was demanding equal chastity in man and woman, the new
woman of Juvenal boldly claims a vicious freedom equal to
her husband’s.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 281.</note> The testimony of Petronius is tainted by
a suspicion of prurient imagination. But the student of other
sources can hardly doubt that, in the first century, as in the
fourth, the Roman lady of rank sometimes degraded herself by
a servile <hi rend="italic">liaison</hi>. A decree of Vespasian’s reign, which his
biographer tells us was called for by the general licence,
punished the erring matron with the loss of her rank.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xi. auctor senatui fuit
decernendi ut quae se alieno servo
junxisset ancilla haberetur; cf. Mart.
vi. 39; <hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> iv. 9, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
These illustrations from other authorities may serve
towards a judicial estimate of Juvenal’s famous satire on
women. That it is not a prurient invention is proved by the
pages of Tacitus and Suetonius and the records of Roman
morals for more than two centuries. On the other hand, it
must be read with some reservations. Juvenal is a rhetorician
with a fiery temperament, who will colour and exaggerate, if
he will not invent. He is intensely prejudiced and conventional,
a man to whom desertion of ancient usage is almost as
bad as a breach of the moral law, a man incapable of seeing
that the evils of a new social movement may be more than compensated
by the good which it brings. Moreover, the graver
vices which he depicts with so much realistic power were
certainly not so general as he implies. It is to be suspected
that single instances of abnormal depravity have swelled in
his heated imagination till they have become types of whole
classes of sinners. At the worst, these vices infected only a
comparatively small class, idle, luxurious, enervated by the
slave system, depraved by the example of a vicious court.
The very scorn and indignation with which Juvenal pillories
the aristocratic debauchee reveal the existence of a higher
standard of virtue. Both the literature and the inscriptions
of that age make us acquainted with a very different kind of
woman. Over against the Hippia or Saufeia or Messalina of
Juvenal we must set the pure and cultivated women whom
we meet in the pages of Pliny or Tacitus, or the poor soldier’s
concubine in the Inscriptions, who has all the self-denying love
and virtue of our own cottagers’ wives.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2669, 4653, 7383.</note>
</p>

<pb n="88"/><anchor id="Pg88"/>

<p>
Just as Juvenal misunderstood the movement of female
emancipation, which was to culminate in the legislation of the
Antonine age, so has he misconceived some other great social
movements of his time. Two in particular, the invasion of the
new Hellenism and the rise of the Freedmen, he anathematises
with the scorn and old Roman prejudice of the elder Cato.
</p>

<p>
There was nothing new in the invasion of Hellenism in the
time of Juvenal. Nearly three hundred years before his day,
the narrow conservatism of ancient Rome was assailed by
the cosmopolitan culture of Hellas, which it alternately hated
and admired. The knowledge of Greek was widely diffused
in Italy in the time of the Hannibalic war.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. H.</hi> ii. 414 sqq.</note> Almost the last
Roman of the ancient breed stooped in his old age to learn
Greek, in order to train his son in the culture of the world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 469; cf. Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cato</hi>, xxiii.</note>
But there were two different aspects of Hellenism. There
was the Hellenism represented by Homer and Plato and
Chrysippus; and there was the Hellenism of the low comic
stage, of the pimp and parasite. And there were reactions
against the lower Greek influences long before the days of
Juvenal. Cicero, who did more than any man of his race
to translate Greek thought into Roman idiom, yet expressed
as bitter a contempt as Juvenal’s for the fickle, supple,
histrionic Greek adventurer.<note place="foot">Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">Greek World under
Roman Sway</hi>, p. 127.</note> Juvenal is not waging war
with that nobler Hellenism which had furnished models and
inspiration to the great writers of the Augustan age, and
which was destined to refashion Italian culture in the generation
following his death. The emperors, from Julius Caesar
to M. Aurelius, were, with few exceptions, trained in the
literature of Greece, and some of them gave a great impetus to
Greek culture in the West. Augustus delighted in the Old
Comedy, entertained Greek philosophers in his house, and
sprinkled his private letters to Tiberius with Greek quotations.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> 89; <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 21.</note>
Tiberius, although he had lived at Rhodes in his youth, seems
to show less sympathy for the genius of Greece.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 71, sermone Graeco, quanquam
alioquin promptus et facilis, non
tamen usquequaque usus est.</note> Caligula also
can hardly be claimed as a Hellenist. Although he had once
a wild dream of restoring the palace of Polycrates, and one,
more sane, of a canal through the Corinthian Isthmus, he also
<pb n="89"/><anchor id="Pg89"/>thought of wiping out the memory of the poems of Homer.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxi. xxxiv.</note>
Dr. Mahaffy is probably right in treating Claudius as the first
really Hellenist emperor.<note place="foot">Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">The Greek World</hi>, p. 255.</note> Like our own James I., Claudius
was a learned and very ludicrous person. Yet he was perhaps
not so contemptible a character as he is painted by Suetonius.
He had, at any rate, the merit of being a lover of Greek literature,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xlii.</note>
and he heaped honour on the country which gave it birth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxv.</note>
He used to quote Homer in his speeches in the Senate, and
he composed histories in the Greek language, which, by an
imperial ordinance, were to be read aloud regularly in the
Museum of Alexandria.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xlii.</note> In spite of the vices and pompous
follies of Nero, his phil-Hellenism seems to have been a genuine
and creditable impulse. His visits to the Greek festivals, and
his share in the competitions, were not all mere vanity. He
had a futile passion for fame as an artist, and he sought the
applause of the race which had a real artistic tradition.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, lv. erat illi aeternitatis
perpetuaeque famae cupido. Cf. xxiv.</note>
When we reach the plebeian Flavian race, Hellenism is still
favoured. The bluff soldier, Vespasian, had an adequate command
of the Greek language, and was the first emperor who
gave liberal endowments to Greek rhetoric.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xviii.</note> His son
Domitian, that puzzling enigma, the libertine who tried to
revive the morality of the age of Cato, the man who was said,
but most improbably, to confine his reading to the memoirs
of Tiberius, founded a quinquennial festival, with competitions,
on the Greek model, in music, gymnastic, and horsemanship.
By drawing on the inexhaustible stores of Alexandria, he
also repaired the havoc which had been wrought in the Roman
libraries by fire.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xx.</note> Already in Juvenal’s life the brilliant
sophistic movement had set in which was destined to carry
the literary charm of Hellenism throughout the West. From
the close of the first century there appeared in its full bloom
that ingenious technique of style, that power of conquering
all the difficulties of a worn-out or trifling subject, that
delicate command of all varieties of rhythm, which carried the
travelling sophist through a series of triumphs wherever he
wandered. Classical Latin literature about the same time came
<pb n="90"/><anchor id="Pg90"/>to a mysterious end. The only authors of any merit in the
second century wrote in both languages indifferently.<note place="foot">And many in the first century,
Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 3; viii. 4, 1; Friedl. iii. 360;
Martha, <hi rend="italic">Les Moralistes sous l’Empire
Rom.</hi> p. 267; Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">R. Lit.</hi> § 342;
Mackail, <hi rend="italic">R. Lit.</hi> 232.</note> And
the great Emperor, who closes our period, preferred to leave
his inner thoughts to posterity in Greek.
</p>

<p>
Juvenal, however, was not thinking of this great literary
movement. Like so many of his literary predecessors, who
had been formed by the loftier genius of the Greek past,
like Plautus and Cicero, he vented his rage on a degenerate
Hellenism. His shafts were levelled at the suttlers and camp-followers
of the invading army from the East. The phenomena
of Roman social history are constantly repeating themselves
for centuries. And one of the most curious examples of
perpetuity of social sentiment is the hatred and scorn for the
Greek or Levantine character, from the days of Plautus and
the elder Cato to the days of the poet Claudian.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cato</hi>, c. xxii.; Claud. <hi rend="italic">In
Eutrop.</hi> ii. 137, 339.</note> For more
than 600 years, the Roman who had borrowed his best culture,
his polish and ideas from the Greek, was ready to sneer at
the <q>Greekling.</q> The conquerors of Macedon could never
forgive their own conquest by Greek knowledge and versatility,
by which old Roman victories in the field had been avenged.
And, as the pride of the imperial race grew with the consciousness
of great achievements, the political degradation and
economic decay of Greece and Greek-speaking lands produced
a type of character which combined the old cleverness and
keenness of intellect with the moral defects of an impoverished
and subject race. Something of Roman contempt for the Greek
must be set down to that national prejudice and difference of
temperament, which made our ancestors treat the great French
nation, with all its brilliant gifts and immense contributions
to European culture, as a race of posturing dancing-masters.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 85.</note>
Such prejudices are generally more intense in the lower than
in the upper and the cultivated classes. Juvenal, indeed, was
a cultivated man, who knew Greek literature, and had been
formed by Greek rhetors in the schools. But he was also a
Roman plebeian, with that pride of race which is often as deep
in the plebeian as in the aristocrat. He gives voice to the
<pb n="91"/><anchor id="Pg91"/>feeling of his class when he indignantly laments that the true-born
Roman, whose infancy has drunk in the air of the
Aventine, should have to yield place to the supple, fawning
stranger, who has come with the same wind as the figs and
prunes. The Orontes is pouring its pollutions into the Tiber.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 62 sqq.</note>
Every trade and profession, from the master of the highest
studies down to the rope-dancer and the pander, is crowded
with hungry, keen-witted adventurers from the East. Every
island of the Aegean, every city of Asia, is flooding Rome with
its vices and its venal arts.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 69-77.</note> Quickness of intellect and
depravity of morals, the brazen front and the ready tongue are
driving into the shade the simple, unsophisticated honesty of
the old Roman breed. At the morning receptions of the great
patron, the poor Roman client, who has years of honest, quiet
service to show, even the impoverished scion of an ancient
consular line, are pushed aside by some sycophant from the
Euphrates,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 104.</note> who can hardly conceal the brand of recent
servitude upon him. These men, by their smooth speech,
their effrontery and ready wit, their infinite capacity for
assuming every mood and humouring every caprice of the
patron, are creeping into the recesses of great houses, worming
out their secrets, and mastering their virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 72, viscera magnarum
domuum dominique futuri.</note> Rome is
becoming a Greek town,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 60.</note> in which there will soon be no
place for Romans.
</p>

<p>
Much of this indictment, as we have said, is the offspring
of prejudice and temperament. But there was a foundation
of truth under the declamation of Juvenal. The higher
education of Roman youth had for generations been chiefly
in the hands of men of Greek culture, from the days of
Ennius and Crates of Mallus, before the third Punic War.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ill. Gram.</hi> i. ii. antiquissimi
doctorum qui iidem et poëtae et semigraeci
erant (Livium et Ennium dico),
etc.; Strab. vi. 3, 5; A. Gell. xvii. 17, i.</note>
The tutor’s old title <hi rend="italic">literatus</hi> had early given place to that of
<hi rend="italic">grammaticus</hi>.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ill. Gram.</hi> iv.</note> And, of the long line of famous <hi rend="italic">grammatici</hi>
commemorated by Suetonius, there are few who were not by
origin or culture connected with the Greek east. Most of them
had been freedmen of savants or great nobles.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xx. xix. xvi. xv.</note> Some had
<pb n="92"/><anchor id="Pg92"/>actually been bought in the slave market.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ill. Gram.</hi> xiii. Staberius ...
emptus de catasta.</note> The profession
was generally ill-paid and enjoyed little consideration, and
it was often the last resort of those who had failed in other
and not more distinguished callings. Orbilius, the master
of Horace, had been an attendant in a public office.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiii.</note> Others
had been pugilists or low actors in pantomime.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xviii. xxiii.</note> Q. Remmius
Palaemon, whose vices made him infamous in the reign of
Tiberius and Claudius, had been a house-slave, and was
originally a weaver.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxiii.</note> He educated himself while attending
his young master at school, and by readiness, versatility, and
arrogant self-assertion, rose to an income of more than £4000
a year. Sometimes they attained to rank and fortune by being
entrusted with the tuition of the imperial children.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvii.; cf. Quintilian, iv. Prooem.
2; cf. Juv. viii. 186-97.</note> But
the grammarian, to the very end, as a rule never escaped the
double stigma of doubtful origin and of poverty.
</p>

<p>
The medical profession, according to the elder Pliny, was
a Greek art which was seldom practised by Romans.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxix. 17.</note> Julius
Caesar, by giving civic rights to physicians from Egypt and
Hellenic lands,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> xlii.</note> while he raised the status of the medical calling,
also stimulated the immigration of foreign practitioners. The
rank and fortune attained by the court physicians of the early
Caesars, Antonius Musa, the Stertinii,<note place="foot">D. Cass. liii. 30; Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxix.
4; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2983.</note> and others, which
almost rivalled the medical successes of our own day, seemed
to offer a splendid prize. Yet the profession was generally in
low repute.<note place="foot">Juv. x. 221; Petron. 42; D. Cass.
lxxi. 33; lxix. 22; Mart. ii. 16; v. 9;
vi. 31; vi. 53; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 31, 35.</note> It was long recruited from the ranks of old slaves,
and men of the meanest callings. Carpenters and smiths and
undertakers flocked into it, often with only a training of six
months.<note place="foot">Mart. i. 31; i. 48; viii. 74.</note> Galen found most of his medical brethren utterly
illiterate, and recommends them to pay a little attention to
grammar in dealing with their patients.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 231.</note> They compounded
in their own shops, and touted for practice.<note place="foot">Epict. ii. 23, 30, 27.</note> They called in
the aid of spells and witchcraft to reinforce their drugs. We
need not believe all the coarse insinuations of Martial against
their morality, any more than the sneers of Petronius against
<pb n="93"/><anchor id="Pg93"/>their skill. But we are bound to conclude that the profession
held a very different place in public esteem from that which
it enjoys and deserves in our own time.
</p>

<p>
Astrology, which was the aristocratic form of divination,
and involved in many a dark intrigue of the early Empire, was a
Greek as well as a Chaldaean art. The name of the practitioner
often reveals his nationality. The Seleucus<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, iv. vi.</note> and Ptolemaeus
who affected to guide the fate of Otho, and the Ascletarion of
Domitian’s reign,<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiv. xv.; cf. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> xiv.;
<hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxxvi.</note> are only representatives of a nameless crowd.
And their strange power is seen in that tale of a Greek
diviner, Pammenes, in the last years of Nero, whose horoscopes
led to the tragic end of P. Anteius and Ostorius Scapula.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 14.</note> In
other countless arts of doubtful repute, which ministered to the
pleasure or amusement of the crowd, the Greek was always
an adept. But it was his success as a courtier and accomplished
flatterer of the great, which chiefly roused the scornful
hatred of Juvenal and his fellows. The <q>adulandi gens prudentissima,</q>
would hardly have been guilty of the simple and
obvious grossness of flattery which the rhetoric of Juvenal
attributes to them.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 100.</note> They knew their trade better than the
Roman plebeian. It was an old and highly rewarded profession
in Greece, and had often been the theme of Greek moralists.
Plutarch wrote an elaborate treatise on the difference between
the sycophant and the true friend, in which he seems almost
to exhaust the wily resources of the pretender. Lucian, with
his delicate irony, seems almost to raise the Greek skill in
adulation to the level of a fine art.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Merc. Cond.</hi> c. 16, 19.</note> And the polished and
versatile Greek, with his lively wit, his delicate command of
expression, his cool audacity, and his unscrupulousness, was a
formidable rival of the coarser Roman parasite celebrated in
Latin comedy. We can well imagine that the young Greek,
fresh from the schools of Ionia, was a livelier companion at
dinner than the proud Roman man of letters who snatched
the dole and disdained himself for receiving it.
</p>

<p>
There is perhaps no phase of Roman society in Domitian’s
day which we know more intimately than the life of the client.
It is photographed, in all its sordid slavery, by both Juvenal
and Martial. And Martial himself is perhaps the best example
<pb n="94"/><anchor id="Pg94"/>of a man of genius submitting, with occasional intervals of
proud rebellion,<note place="foot">Mart. i. 104, ii. 68.</note> to a degradation which in our eyes no poverty
could excuse. The client of the early Empire was a totally
different person from the client of Republican times. In
the days of freedom, the tie of patron and client was rather
that of clansman and chief; it was justified by political and
social necessity, and ennobled by feelings of loyalty and mutual
obligation. Under the Empire, the relation was tainted by
the selfish materialism of the age; it had seldom any
trace of sentiment. The rich man was expected to have a
humble train of dependents to maintain his rank and consequence.
There was a host of needy people ready to do him
such service. The hungry client rushed to his patron’s morning
reception, submitted to all his coldness and caprice, or to the
insolence of his menials, followed his chair through the streets,
and ran on his errands, for the sake of a miserable alms in
money or in kind.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 100; v. 17; Mart. xii. 18—

<lg>
<l>Dum per limina te potentiorum</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Sudatrix toga ventilat, etc.;</l>
</lg>

iii. 7, 36; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xvi; <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> vii.</note> The payment was sometimes supplemented
by a cast-off cloak, or an invitation at the last moment to fill
a place at dinner, when perhaps it could not be accepted.<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 79; Juv. v. 17.</note> In
the train which the great man gathered about him, to swell his
importance, were to be seen, not only the starving man of
letters, the loafer and mere mendicant, but the sons of ruined
houses <q>sprung from Troy,</q> and even senators and men of
consular rank who had a clientèle of their own.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 100—

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 6">Jubet a praecone vocari</l>
<l>Ipsos Trojugenas.</l>
</lg></note>
</p>

<p>
Nothing throws a more lurid light on the economic
condition of Italy in the time of the early Empire than this
form of pensioned dependence. The impression which we
derive from Juvenal and Martial is that of a society divided
between a small class of immensely wealthy people, and an
almost starving proletariat.<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 43; iii. 38, 12, pallet cetera
turba fame; Juv. iii. 153, 161; xi. 40.</note> Poverty seems almost universal,
except in the freedman class, who by an industrial energy and
speculative daring, which were despised by the true-born
Roman, were now rapidly rising to opulence. The causes of
this plebeian indigence can only be glanced at here. The
agricultural revolution, which ruined the small freeholders and
created the plantation system,<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. H.</hi> ii. 374 (Tr.).</note> had driven great numbers of
<pb n="95"/><anchor id="Pg95"/>once prosperous farmers to the capital, to depend on the
granaries of the State, or on the charity of a wealthy patron.
Such men were kept in poverty and dependence by that general
contempt for trade and industrial pursuits which always prevails
in a slave-owning society. Many of the greatest families
had been reduced to poverty by proscription and confiscation.
A great noble might be keeping sheep on a Laurentine farm,
if he could not win a pension from the grace of the Emperor.
At the same time, from various causes, what we should call
the liberal professions, with the doubtful exception of medicine,
tortured those engaged in them by the contrast between ambitious
hopes and the misery of squalid poverty. <q>Make your son an
auctioneer or an undertaker rather than an advocate or a man
of letters</q> is the advice of Martial and Juvenal, and of the
shrewd vulgar guests of Trimalchio.<note place="foot">Mart. iv. 5; v. 56—

<lg>
<l>Artes discere vult pecuniosas?</l>
<l>Fac discat citharoedus aut choraules.</l>
<l>Si duri puer ingeni videtur,</l>
<l>Praeconem facias, vel architectum;</l>
</lg>

Juv. vii. 104; x. 226; Petron. 46,
destinavi illum artificii docere, aut
tonstreinum aut praeconem etc.</note> Any mean and malodorous
trade will be more lucrative than the greatest knowledge and
culture. The rich literary amateur, who should have been a
Maecenas, in that age became an author himself, composed his
own Thebaid or Codrid, and would only help the poor man of
genius by the loan of an unfurnished hall for a reading.<note place="foot">Juv. vii. 38 sqq.</note> The
unabashed mendicancy of Martial shows the mean straits to
which the genuine literary man was reduced.<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 43; iv. 40; v. 42, quas
dederis, solas semper habebis opes.</note> The historian will
not earn as much as the reader of the <hi rend="italic">Acta Diurna</hi>.<note place="foot">Juv. vii. 104.</note> It is the
same with education. What costs the father least is the training
of his son. The man who will expend a fortune on his baths
and colonnades, can spare a Quintilian only a fraction of what he
will give for a pastry cook.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 180.</note> The grammarian, who is expected
to be master of all literature, will be lucky if he receives as much
for the year as a charioteer gains by a single victory.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. ad fin.</note> If the
rhetor, weary of mock battles, descends into the real arena of
the courts, he fares no better.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 121 sqq.</note> The bar is overcrowded by men
to whom no other career of ambition is open, by old informers
who find their occupation gone, by the sons of noble houses
who parade the glory of their ancestors in order to attract
vulgar clients. They are carried in a litter, surrounded by
<pb n="96"/><anchor id="Pg96"/>slaves and dependents, down to the courts of the Centumviri.
The poor pleader must hire or borrow purple robes
and jewelled rings, if he is to compete with them. And in
the end, he may find his honorarium for a day’s hard pleading
to be a leg of pork, a jar of tunnies, or a few flasks of cheap
wine. In this materialised society all the prizes go to the
coarser qualities; there is nothing but neglect and starvation
before taste and intellect. And poverty is punished by being
forced to put on the show of wealth.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 182; Martha, <hi rend="italic">Moralistes
sous l’Emp.</hi> p. 400.</note> That stately person in
violet robes who stalks through the forum, or reclines in a
freshly decorated chair, followed by a throng of slaves, has
just pawned his ring to buy a dinner.<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 57.</note> That matron, who has
sold the last pieces of her ancestral plate, will hire splendid
dress, a sedan chair, and a troop of attendants, to go in proper
state to the games.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 353.</note> Thus you have the spectacle of a
society divided between the idle, luxurious rich and the lazy,
hungry poor, who imitate all the vices of the rich, and although
too proud to work, are not ashamed to borrow or to beg.
</p>

<p>
In such a society, where the paths of honest industry seemed
closed to the poor, or as yet undiscovered, the great problem
was how to secure without labour a share of the wealth which
was monopolised by the few. The problem was solved by the
obsequiousness of the client, or by the arts of the will-hunter.
Owing to celibacy and vice, childlessness in that age was extraordinarily
common in the upper class. In a society of <q>ambitious
poverty,</q> a society where poverty was unable, or where
it disdained, to find the path to competence through honest toil,
the wealthy, without natural heirs, offered a tempting prey to
the needy adventurer. Captation by every kind of mean flattery,
or vicious service, became a recognised profession. In the
Croton of Petronius there are only two classes, the rich and
the sycophant, the hunters and the hunted.<note place="foot">Petron. 116, in hac urbe nemo
liberos tollit ... aut captantur aut
captant.</note> Even men of
high position, with no temptation from want, would stoop to
this detestable trade.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">e.g.</hi> Regulus, Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 20.</note> And the social tone which tolerated
the captator, made it almost an honour to be beset on a <anchor id="corr96"/><corr sic="sick bed">sick-bed</corr> by these rapacious sycophants. One of the darkest and
most repulsive features in that putrescent society was the
<pb n="97"/><anchor id="Pg97"/>social value which attached to a vicious and shameful childlessness.
A morose and unlovely old age could thus gather
around it a little court of dependents and pretended friends,
such as a career of great achievement would hardly attract.
There have been few more loathsome characters than the
polished hypocrite by the sick-bed of his prey, shedding tears
of feigned sympathy, while with eager eyes he is noting every
symptom of the approaching end.<note place="foot">Juv. xii. 100; i. 36; Mart. v. 39;
Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii, 20; Petron. 140.</note>
</p>

<p>
Juvenal and Petronius, the embittered plebeian, and the
cynical, fastidious epicure of Nero’s court, alike treat their age
as utterly corrupted and vulgarised by the passion for money;
<q>inter nos sanctissima divitiarum Majestas.</q><note place="foot">Juv. i. 112; Petron. 88, pecuniae
cupiditas haec tropica instituit.</note> No virtue, no
gifts, no eminence of service, will be noticed in the poor.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 164.</note> A
great fortune will conceal the want of talent, sense, or common
decency. Everything is forgiven to the master of money
bags, even the brand of the slave prison.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 131, 103; i. 26; iv. 98; Mart.
ii. 29, iii. 29; v. 13, 35.</note> In Juvenal and
Martial probably the most resonant note is the cry of the poor—<q>How
long.</q> Yet, after all, it is not a fierce cry of revolt;
against that highly organised and centralised society the disinherited
never dreamed of rebellion, even when the Goths were
under the walls. It is rather an appeal, though often a bitter and
angry appeal, for pity and a modest share in a wasted abundance.
In the poems of Juvenal and Martial, as in the sentiment of
the colleges and municipalities for generations, the one hope for
the mass of helpless indigence lay in awaking the generosity and
charity of the rich. The rich, as we shall see in another
chapter, admitted the obligation, and responded to the claim,
often in the most lavish fashion. A long line of emperors not
only fed the mob of the capital, but squandered the resources
of the State in providing gross and demoralising amusements
for them.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xliii.-v.; <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xviii.;
<hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xxi; <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xi. xii.; <hi rend="italic">Titus</hi>, vii.;
<hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> iv.; D. Cass. 65. 25; Spart.
<hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> vii. D. Cass. 68. 10, 15;
Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Anton.</hi> vi.; but cp. Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> xlvii.; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii 62, D. Cass.
66. 15; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xliv.; D. Cass.
54. 2; 68. 2; Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Anton. P.</hi> xii.</note> Under the influence of the Stoic teaching of the
brotherhood of man and the duty of mutual help, both private
citizens and benevolent princes, from Nero to M. Aurelius,
created charitable foundations for the orphan and the
<pb n="98"/><anchor id="Pg98"/>needy.<note place="foot">Victor. <hi rend="italic">Epit.</hi> 12; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> vii.
§ 12; Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Anton.</hi> xxvi.; <hi rend="italic">Ant.
P.</hi> viii.; D. Cass. 68. 5; <hi rend="italic">Orelli Henz.</hi>
4365, 7244; Friedländer, <hi rend="italic">Petron. Einleit.</hi>
49; Duruy, v. 429; iv. 787; Boissier,
<hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 208; cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ix. 30.</note> Public calamities were relieved again and again by
imperial aid and private charity.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 62; ii. 47, 48.</note> The love of wealth was
strong, but a spirit of benevolence was in the air, even in the
days of Juvenal; and the constant invectives of poet or philosopher
against wealth and luxury are not so much the sign
of a growing selfishness, as of a spreading sense of the duty
of the fortunate to the miserable. Although the literary
men seem never to have thought of any economic solution of
the social problem, through the tapping of fresh sources of
wealth from which all might draw, yet there can be no doubt
that there was, at least in provincial cities, a great industrial
movement in the Antonine age, which gave wealth to some,
and a respectable competence to many. The opulent freedman
and the contented artisan have left many a memorial in the
inscriptions. Yet the movement had not solved the social
problem in the days of Lucian, as it has not solved it after
seventeen centuries. The cry of the poor against the selfish
rich, which rings in the ears of the detached man of letters at
the end of the Antonine age, will still ring in the ears of the
ascetic Salvianus, when the Germans have passed the Rhine.<note place="foot">Salv. <hi rend="italic">De Gub. Dei</hi>, v. 30; <hi rend="italic">Ad
Eccles.</hi> iv. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
The scorn and hatred of Juvenal for wealth and its vices is
natural to a class which was too proud to struggle out of poverty,
by engaging in the industries which it despised. And the freedman,
who occupied the vacant field, and rose to opulence, is
even more an object of hatred to Juvenal and Martial than
the recreant noble or the stingy patron. He was an alien
of servile birth, and he had made himself wealthy by the
usual method of thinking of nothing but gold. These men,
who were not even free Romans, had mastered the power
which commands the allegiance of the world. The rise of
this new class to wealth and importance probably irritated
men of Juvenal’s type more than any other sign of social
injustice in their time. And the Trimalchio of Petronius, a
man of low, tainted origin, the creature of economic accident,
whose one faith is in the power of money, who boasts of his
fortune as if it had been won by real talent or honourable
<pb n="99"/><anchor id="Pg99"/>service, who expends it with coarse ostentation and a ludicrous
affectation of cultivated taste, may be tolerated in literature,
if not in actual life, for the charm of a certain kindly bonhomie
and honest vulgarity, which the art of Petronius has
thrown around him. Yet, after all, we must concede to
Juvenal and Martial, that such a person is always a somewhat
unpleasing social product. But the subject is so important
that it claims a chapter to itself. And, fortunately
for us and our readers, the new freedmen were not all of the
type of Trimalchio.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. The society of the freedmen"/><index index="pdf" level1="III. The society of the freedmen"/>
<head>CHAPTER III</head>

<head type="sub">THE SOCIETY OF THE FREEDMEN</head>

<p>
The historian, who is occupied with war and politics, and the
fate of princes and nobles, is apt to lose sight of great silent
movements in the dim masses of society. And, in the history
of the early Empire, the deadly conflict between the Emperor
and the Senate, the carnival of luxury, and the tragic close of
so many reigns, have diverted attention from social changes of
immense moment. Not the least important of these was the
rise of the freedmen, in the face of the most violent prejudice,
both popular and aristocratic. And literature has thrown
its whole weight on the side of prejudice, and given full vent
alike to the scorn of the noble, and to the hate and envy of the
plebeian. The movement, indeed, was so swift and far spreading
that old conservative instincts might well be alarmed.
Everywhere in the inscriptions freedmen are seen rising to
wealth and consequence throughout the provinces, as well
as in Italy, and winning popularity and influence by profuse
benefactions to colleges and municipalities. In almost every
district of the Roman Empire the order of the Augustales,
which was composed to a great extent of wealthy freedmen,<note place="foot">On the Augustales <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Orell. Henz.</hi>
ii. p. 197; iii. p. 427; Friedländer,
<hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> p. 39; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm.
Staatsverw.</hi> i. 513 sqq.; Nessling, <hi rend="italic">De
Seviris Augustalibus.</hi></note>
has left its memorials. <q>Freedman’s wealth</q> in Martial’s day
had become a proverb.<note place="foot">v. 13, 6, et libertinas arca flagellat
opes; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 27, § 5, patrimonium
libertini.</note> Not only are they crowding all the
meaner trades, from which Roman pride shrank contemptuously,
but, by industry, shrewdness, and speculative daring,
they are becoming great capitalists and landowners on a
senatorial scale. The Trimalchio of Petronius, who has not
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>even seen some of his estates,<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 48.</note> if we allow for some artistic
exaggeration, is undoubtedly the representative of a great
class. In the reign of Nero, a debate arose in the Senate
on the insolence and misconduct of freedmen.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 27, si separarentur
libertini manifestam fore penuriam
ingenuorum.</note> And it was
argued by those opposed to any violent measures of repression,
that the class was widely diffused; they were found in overwhelming
numbers in the city tribes, in the lower offices
of the civil service, in the establishments of the magistrates
and priests; a considerable number even of the knights and
Senate drew their origin from this source. If freedmen were
marked off sharply as a separate grade, the scanty numbers
of the freeborn would be revealed. In the reigns of Claudius
and Nero especially, freedmen rose to the highest places in
the imperial service, sometimes by unquestionable knowledge,
tact, and ability, sometimes by less creditable arts. The
promotion of a Narcissus or a Pallas was also a stroke of
policy, the assertion of the prince’s independence of a jealous
nobility. The rule of the freedmen was a bitter memory
to the Senate.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 88.</note> The scorn of Pliny for Pallas expresses
the long pent-up feelings of his order; it is a belated
vengeance for the humiliation they endured in the evil days
when they heaped ridiculous flattery on the favourite, and
voted him a fortune and a statue.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 29; viii 6.</note> Some part of the joy
with which the accession of Trajan was hailed by the aristocracy
was due to the hope that the despised interlopers would
be relegated to their proper obscurity. Tacitus is undoubtedly
glancing at the Claudian régime when he grimly congratulates
the Germans on the fact that their freedmen are little above
the level of slaves, that they have seldom any power in the
family, and never in the State.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 25, liberti non multum
supra servos sunt, raro aliquod momentum
in domo, nunquam in civitate.</note>
</p>

<p>
It shows the immense force of old Roman conservatism
and of social prejudice which is the same from age to age,
when men so cultivated, yet of such widely different temperament
and associations as Pliny and Tacitus, Juvenal and
Martial<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 29; iii. 29; xi. 37; iii.
82; v. 14.</note> and Petronius, denounce or ridicule an irresistible
social movement. We can now see that the rise of the
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>emancipated slave was not only inevitable, but that it was, on
the whole, salutary and rich in promise for the future. The
slave class of antiquity really corresponded to our free labouring
class. But, unlike the mass of our artisans, it contained many
who, from accident of birth and education, had a skill and
knowledge which their masters often did not possess.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ill. Gram.</hi> xiii., xvii., xx.; cf.
Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 158.</note> The
slaves who came from the ancient seats of civilisation in the
East are not to be compared with the dark gross races who
seem to be stamped by nature as of an inferior breed. This
frequent mental and moral equality of the Roman slave with
his master had forced itself upon men of the detached
philosophic class, like Seneca, and on kindly aristocrats, like
Pliny.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47, § 1; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 18,
3; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 21; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77, § 31; Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 16, 1; iii. 19, 7; ii. 17, 9;
cf. Juv. xiv. 16.</note> It must have been hard to sit long hours in the
library beside a cultivated slave-amanuensis, or to discuss the
management of lands and mines and quarries with a shrewd,
well-informed slave-agent, or to be charmed by the grace and
wit of some fair, frail daughter of Ionia, without having some
doubts raised as to the eternal justice of such an institution.
Nay, it is certain that slaves were often treated as friends,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47, servi sunt, immo
humiles amici. Cf. Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i.
11, 12; Eurip. <hi rend="italic">Ion</hi>, 854; <hi rend="italic">Helen.</hi> 730;
Wallon, <hi rend="italic">L’Esclav.</hi> iii. 22.</note>
and received freedom and a liberal bequest at their master’s
death. Many educated slaves, as we have seen, rose to
distinction and fortune as teachers and physicians.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> supra, <ref target="Pg92">p. 92</ref>.</note> But the
field of trade and industry was the most open and the most
tempting. The Senator was forbidden, down to the last age of
the Empire, both by law and sentiment, to increase his fortune
by commerce.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 69. 16; <hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> xiii. 1, 21;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i 197.</note> The plebeian, saturated with Roman prejudice,
looking for support to the granaries of the state or the dole
of the wealthy patron, turned with disdain from occupations
which are in our days thought innocent, if not honourable.
Juvenal feels almost as much scorn for the auctioneer and
undertaker as he has for the pander, and treats almost as a
criminal the merchant who braves the wintry Aegean with a
cargo of wine from Crete.<note place="foot">Juv. xiv. 270.</note> His friend Umbricius, worsted in
the social struggle, and preparing to quit Rome for a retreat in
Campania, among the other objects of his plebeian scorn, is
<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>specially disgusted with the low tribe who contract for the
building of a house, or who farm the dues of a port or undertake
to cleanse a river-bed.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 32.</note> There is no room left in Rome
for men who will not soil themselves with such sordid trades.
Manifestly, if the satirist is not burlesquing the feeling of his
class, there was plenty of room left for the vigorous freedman
who could accept Vespasian’s motto that no gain is unsavoury.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xxiii.</note>
But those men had not only commercial tact and ability, the
wit to see where money was to be made by seizing new openings
and unoccupied fields for enterprise; they had also among
them men of great ambitions, men capable of great affairs. It
required no common deftness, suppleness, and vigilant energy
for an old slave to work his way upwards through the grades
of the imperial chancery, to thread the maze of deadly intrigue,
in the reigns of Claudius or Nero, and to emerge at last as
master of the palace. Yet one of these freedmen ministers,
when he died, had served ten emperors, six of whom had
come to a violent end.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> iii. 3, 83, Tu toties
mutata ducum juga rite tulisti Integer, etc.</note> That a class so despised and depressed
should rise to control the trade, and even the administration
of the Empire, furnishes a presumption that they were needed,
and that they were not unworthy of their destiny.
</p>

<p>
Yet however inevitable, or even desirable, this great revolution
may seem to the cool critic of the twentieth century, it is
possible that, had he lived in the first, he might have denounced
it as vigorously as Juvenal. The literary and artistic spirit,
often living in a past golden age, and remotely detached from
the movements going on around it, is prone to regard them
with uneasy suspicion. It is moved by sacred sentiment, by
memories and distant ideals, by fastidious taste, which expresses
itself often with passionate hatred for what seems to it
revolutionary sacrilege. It is also apt to fasten on the more
grotesque and vulgar traits of any great popular movement,
and to use a finished skill in making it ridiculous. It was in
this way that literature treated the freedmen. They had many
gross and palpable faults; they were old slaves and Orientals;
as they rose in the world they were eager for money, and
they got it; they were, many of them, naturally vulgar, and
they paraded their new wealth with execrable taste, and
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>trampled on better, though poorer, men than themselves,
Juvenal and Martial, by birth and associations, have little in
common with that accomplished exquisite of the Neronian
circle who has painted with the power of careless genius the
household of the <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi> Trimalchio. Yet they have an
equal scorn or detestation for the new man who was forcing
his way from the lowest debasement of servile life to fortune
and power. But the embittered man of letters, humiliated by
poverty, yet brimful of Roman pride, avenges his ideals with
a rougher, heavier hand than the Epicurean noble, who had
joined in the <q>Noctes Neronis</q> with a delicate, scornful
cynicism, who was too disillusioned, and too fastidiously contemptuous,
to waste anger on what he despised. Juvenal
would blast and wither the objects of his hatred. Petronius
takes the surer method of making these people supremely
ridiculous. The feeling of men like Juvenal and Martial is
a mixture of contempt and envy and outraged taste. The
Grub Street man of letters in those days despised plodding
industry because he dearly loved fits of idleness; he hated
wealth because he was poor. The polished man of the world
was alternately amused and disgusted by the spectacle of
sudden fortune accumulated by happy chance or unscrupulous
arts, with no tradition of dignity to gild its grossness, yet
affecting and burlesquing the tastes of a world from which it
was separated by an impassable gulf. There is more moral
sentiment, more old Roman feeling, in the declamation of
Juvenal than in the cold artistic scorn of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>; there
is also more personal and class feeling. The triumph of mere
money is to Juvenal a personal affront as well as a moral
catastrophe. Poverty now makes a man ridiculous.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 153, Nil habet infelix
paupertas durius in se, Quam quod
ridiculos homines facit; 164.</note> It blocks
the path of the finest merit. The rich freedman who claims
the foremost place at a levée is equally objectionable because
he was born on the Euphrates, and because he is the owner
of five taverns which yield HS.400,000 a year.<note place="foot">Id. i. 104.</note> The impoverished
knight must quit his old place on the benches to
make way for some auctioneer or pimp, some old slave from
the Nile who stalks in with purple robes and bejewelled
fingers, and hair reeking with unguents.<note place="foot">Id. i. 26; iv. 108.</note> The only refuge
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>will soon be some half-deserted village on old-fashioned Sabine
ground, where the country folk sit side by side in the
same white tunics with their aediles in the grassy theatre.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 173.</note>
It is evident from Juvenal, Martial, and Petronius that
the popular hostility to the new men was partly the result of
envy at their success, partly of disgust at their parade of it.
Juvenal and Martial are often probably dressing up the rough
epigrams of the crowd. We can almost hear the contemptuous
growl as one of these people, suspected of a dark crime,
sweeps by in his downy sedan. That other noble knight used
to hawk the cheap fish of his native Egypt, and now possesses
a palace towering over the Forum, with far-spreading colonnades
and acres of shady groves.<note place="foot">Id. iv. 5, 23; vii. 180.</note> A eunuch minister has reared a
pile which out-tops the Capitol.<note place="foot">Id. xiv. 91, Ut spado vincebat
Capitolia nostra Posides; cf. Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xxviii.; Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxxi. 2.</note> Fellows who used to blow
the horn in the circus of country towns now give gladiatorial
shows themselves.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 34 sqq.</note> Prejudice or envy may not improbably
have invented some of the tales of crime and turpitude by
which these fortunes had been won. Rome was a city of
poisonous rumour. Yet slavery was not a nursery of virtue,
and the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> leaves the impression that the emancipated
slave too often imitated the vices of his master. The poisoner,
the perjurer, the minion, were probably to be found in the
rising class. After their kind in all ages, they looked down
with vulgar insolence on those less fortunate or more scrupulous.
When they rose to the highest place, the imperial freedmen
were often involved in peculation and criminal intrigue.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 37; xii. 25, 65;
xi. 29; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> lxvii.; D. Cass.
lix. 29.</note> Yet,
after all reservations, the ascent of the freedmen remains a
great and beneficent revolution. The very reasons which made
Juvenal hate it most are its best justification to a modern
mind. It gave hope of a future to the slave; by creating
a free industrial class, it helped to break down the cramped
social ideal of the slave-owner and the soldier; it planted in
every municipality a vigorous mercantile class, who were
often excellent and generous citizens. Above all, it asserted
the dignity of man. The vehement iteration of Juvenal is the
best testimony to the sweep and force of the movement. And
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>the later student of Roman society cannot afford to neglect a
great social upheaval which, in an aristocratic society, dominated
by pride of class and race, made an Oriental slave first
minister of the greatest monarchy in history, while it placed
men of servile origin in command of nearly all the industrial
arts and commerce of the time.
</p>

<p>
The reign of the freedman in public affairs began with the
foundation of the Empire, when Julius Caesar installed some of
his household as officers of the mint.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> lxxvi.; cf. Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 56 sqq.</note> The emperor in the
first century was, theoretically at least, only the first citizen, and
his household was modelled on the fashion of other great
houses. In the management of those vast senatorial
estates, which were often scattered over three continents, there
was need of an elaborate organisation, and freedmen of education
and business capacity were employed to administer such
private realms. And in the organisation of a great household,
there was a hierarchy of office which offered a career to
the shrewd and trustworthy slave. Many such careers can
be traced in the inscriptions, from the post of valet or groom
of the bedchamber, through the offices of master of the jewels
and the wardrobe, superintendent of the carriages or the vineyards,
up to the highest financial control.<note place="foot">For such a career cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6344.</note>
</p>

<p>
During the first century the same system was transferred
to the imperial administration. It suited the cautious
policy of Augustus to disguise his vast powers under the quiet
exterior of an ordinary noble; and the freedmen of his
household carried on the business of the State. He sternly
punished any excesses or treachery among his servants.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> lxvii.</note>
Tiberius gave them little power, until his character began to
deteriorate.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 6.</note> Under Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, the imperial
freedmen attained their greatest ascendency. Callistus,
Narcissus, and Pallas rose to the rank of great ministers, and,
in the reign of Claudius, were practically masters of the world.
They accumulated enormous wealth by abusing their power,
and making a traffic in civic rights, in places or pardons.
Polyclitus, who was sent to compose the troubles in Britain
in 61 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, travelled with an enormous train, and gave the
provinces an exhibition of the arrogance of their servile masters.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 39.</note>
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>Helius was left to carry on the government during Nero’s
theatrical travels, and the exhibitions of his artistic skill in
Greece.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxiii.</note> Galba put to death two of the great freedmen of
Nero’s reign, but himself fell under the influence of others as
corrupt and arrogant, and he showered the honours of rank on
the infamous Icelus.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxiv. 3; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Galba</hi>, xiv.;
Plut. <hi rend="italic">Galba</hi>, c. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is curious that it was left for Vitellius to break the
reign of the freedmen by assigning offices in the imperial
bureaux to the knights, the policy which was said to have
been recommended by Maecenas,<note place="foot">D. Cass. lii. 25; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 58,
Vitellius ministeria principatus per
libertos agi solita in equites Romanos
disponit.</note> and which was destined to
prevail in the second century. But the change was very
incomplete, and the brief tragic reign of Vitellius was disgraced
by the ascendency for a time of his minion Asiaticus,
whom the Emperor raised to the highest honours, then sold
into a troop of wandering gladiators, and finally received back
again into freedom and favour.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> xii.</note> The policy of the Flavian
dynasty in the employment of freedmen is rather ambiguous.
Vespasian is charged with having elevated Hormus, a disreputable
member of the class, and with having appointed
to places of trust the most rapacious agents.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xvi.</note> But this is
probably a calumny of the Neronian and Othonian circle who
defamed their conqueror. Under Domitian, the freedmen,
Entellus and Abascantus, held two of the great secretaryships.
But it is distinctly recorded that Domitian distributed offices
impartially between the freedmen and the knights.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> vii. quaedam ex maximis
officiis inter libertinos equitesque communicavit.</note> On the
accession of Trajan, Pliny, in his Panegyric, exults in the fall of
the freedmen from the highest place.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 88.</note> Yet Hadrian is said to
have procured his selection as emperor by carefully cultivating
the favour of Trajan’s freedmen. Hadrian, in reorganising
the imperial administration, and founding the bureaucratic
system, which was finally elaborated by Diocletian and Constantine,
practically confined the tenure of the three great
secretaryships to men of equestrian rank. Among his secretaries
was the historian Suetonius.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> iv., xxi.; Macé,
<hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 91.</note> Antoninus Pius severely
repressed men of servile origin in the interest of pure
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>administration;<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi> vi., xi.</note> but they regained some influence for a time
under M. Aurelius, and rose still higher under his infamous son.
</p>

<p>
The position of freedmen in the imperial administration
was partly, as we have seen, a tradition of aristocratic households.
The emperor employed his freedmen to write his
despatches and administer the finances of the Empire, as
he would have used them to write his private letters or to
manage his private estates. But, in the long conflict between
the prince and the Senate, the employment of trusted freedmen
in imperial affairs was also a measure of policy. It was meant
to teach the nobles that the Empire could be administered
without their aid.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 56.</note> Nor was the confidence of the Emperor
in his humble subordinates unjustified. The eulogies of the
great freedmen in Seneca and Statius, even if they be exaggerated,
leave the impression that a Polybius, a Claudius
Etruscus, or an Abascantus were, in many respects, worthy of
their high place. The provinces were, on the whole, well
governed and happy in the very years when the capital was
seething with conspiracy, and racked with the horrors of confiscation
and massacre. This must have been chiefly due to
the knowledge, tact, and ability of the great officials of the
palace. Although of servile origin, they must have belonged
to that considerable class of educated slaves who, along with
the versatility and tact of the Hellenic East, brought to their
task also a knowledge and a literary and linguistic skill which
were not common among Roman knights. The three imperial
secretaryships, <hi rend="italic">a rationibus</hi>, <hi rend="italic">a libellis</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">ab epistulis</hi>, covered
a vast field of administration, and the duties of these great
ministries could only have been performed by men of great
industry, talent, and diplomatic adroitness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. p. 83.</note> The Polybius
to whom Seneca, from his exile in Sardinia, wrote a consolatory
letter on the death of his brother, was the successor
of Callistus, as secretary of petitions, in the reign of Claudius,
and also the emperor’s adviser of studies. Seneca magnifies
the dignity, and also the burden, of his great rank, which
demands an abnegation of all the ordinary pleasures of life.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> vi. vii.</note>
A man has no time to indulge a private grief who has to study
and arrange for the Emperor’s decision thousands of appeals
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>coming from every quarter of the world. Yet this busy man
could find time for literary work, and his translations from the
Greek are lauded by the philosopher with an enthusiasm of
which the cruelty of time does not allow us to estimate the
value.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> xi.</note> The panegyric on Claudius Etruscus, composed by
Statius, records an even more remarkable career.<note place="foot">Statius, <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> iii. 3.</note> Claudius
Etruscus died at the age of eighty, in the reign of Domitian,
having served in various capacities under ten emperors,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 66, Tibereia primum Aula tibi—Panditur.</note> six
of whom had died by a violent death. It was a strangely
romantic life, to which we could hardly find a parallel in
the most democratic community in modern times. Claudius,
a Smyrniote slave,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 60.</note> in the household of Tiberius, was emancipated
and promoted by that Emperor. He followed the
train of Caligula to Gaul,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 70.</note> rose to higher rank under Claudius,
and, probably in Nero’s reign, on the retirement of Pallas,
was appointed to that financial office of which the world-wide
cares are pompously described by the poet biographer.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 86.</note> The
gold of Iberian mines, the harvests of Egypt, the fleeces of
Tarentine flocks, pearls from the depths of Eastern seas, the
ivory tribute of the Indies, all the wealth wafted to Rome by
every wind, are committed to his keeping. He had also the task
of disbursing a vast revenue for the support of the populace,
for roads and bulwarks against the sea, for the splendour of
temples and palaces.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 100.</note> Such cares left space only for brief
slumber and hasty meals; there was none for pleasure. Yet
Claudius had the supreme satisfaction of wielding enormous
power, and he occasionally shared in its splendour. The poor
slave from the Hermus had a place in the <q>Idumaean
triumph</q> of Vespasian, which his quiet labours had prepared,
and he was raised by that emperor to the benches of the
knights.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 145.</note> The only check in that prosperous course seems to
have been a brief exile to the shores of Campania in the reign
of Domitian.<note place="foot">Mart. vi. 83; Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> iii. 160.</note>
</p>

<p>
Abascantus,<note place="foot">As to the form of his name <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Markland’s <hi rend="italic">Statius</hi>, p. 238.</note> the secretary <hi rend="italic">ab epistulis</hi> of Domitian’s reign,
has also been commemorated by Statius. That great office
which controlled the imperial correspondence with all parts of
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>the world, was generally held by freedmen in the first century.
Narcissus, in the reign of Claudius, first made it a great
ministry.<note place="foot">Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 91; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi>
xi. 33.</note> Down to the reign of Hadrian the despatches both
in Greek and Latin were under a single superintendence. But
in the reorganisation of the service in the second century, it
was found necessary, from the growing complication of business,
to create two departments of imperial correspondence.<note place="foot">Macé, 92, 93; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi>
i. 86, 87.</note> Men
of rank held the secretaryship from the end of the first century.
Titinius Capito, one of Pliny’s circle, filled the office
under Domitian; Suetonius was appointed by Hadrian.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 12; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 798;
Macé, pp. 89, 115.</note> And
during the Antonine age, the secretaries were often men of
literary distinction.<note place="foot">Macé, pp. 90, 116.</note> Abascantus, the freedman secretary in
the Silvae, had upon his shoulders, according to the poet, the
whole weight of the correspondence with both East and West.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> v. 1, 80.</note>
He received the laurelled despatches from the Euphrates, the
Danube, and the Rhine; he had to watch the distribution of
military grades and commands. He must keep himself informed
of a thousand things affecting the fortunes of the
subject peoples. Yet this powerful minister retained his
native modesty with his growing fortune. His household was
distinguished by all the sobriety and frugality of an Apulian
or Sabine home.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> v. 118 sqq.</note> He could be lavish, however, at the call of
love or loyalty. He gave his wife Priscilla an almost royal
burial.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> v. 210.</note> Embalmed with all the spices and fragrant odours
of the East, and canopied with purple, her body was borne
to her last stately home of marble on the Appian Way.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 88.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some of the great imperial freedmen were of less unexceptionable
character than Claudius Etruscus and Abascantus,
and had a more troubled career. Callistus, Narcissus, and
Pallas, were deeply involved in the intrigues and crimes
connected with the history of Messalina and Agrippina.
Callistus had a part in the murder of Caligula, and prolonged
his power in the following reign. Narcissus revealed the
shameless marriage of Messalina with Silius, and, forestalling
the vacillation of Claudius, had the imperial harlot ruthlessly
struck down as she lay grovelling in the gardens of Lucullus.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 30, 37, 88.</note>
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>But he incurred the enmity of a more formidable woman even
than Messalina, and his long career of plunder was ended by
suicide.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 57; xiii. 1.</note> Pallas had an even longer and more successful, but
a not less infamous and tragic career.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xii. 25, 65.</note> Of all the great freedmen,
probably none approached him in magnificent insolence.
When he was impeached along with Burrus, on a groundless
charge of treason, and when some of his freedmen were called
in evidence as his supposed accomplices, the old slave answered
that he had never degraded his voice by speaking in such
company.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiii. 23.</note> Never, even in those days of self-abasement, did
the Senate sink so low as in its grovelling homage to the
servile minister. At a meeting of the august body in the
year 52, the consul designate made a proposal, which was
seconded by a Scipio, that the praetorian insignia, and a sum
of HS.15,000,000, should be offered to Pallas, together with
the thanks of the state that the descendant of the ancient
kings of Arcadia had thought less of his illustrious race than
of the common weal, and had deigned to be enrolled in the
service of the prince!<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xii. 53; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 6.</note> When Claudius reported that his
minister was satisfied with the compliment, and prayed to be
allowed to remain in his former poverty, a senatorial decree,
engraved on bronze, was set up to commemorate the old-fashioned
frugality of the owner of HS.300,000,000! His
wealth was gained during a career of enormous power in the
worst days of the Empire. He was one of the lovers of
Agrippina,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 25, 65.</note> and, when he made her empress on the death of
Messalina, two kindred spirits for a time ruled the Roman
world. He gratified his patroness by securing the adoption
of Nero by Claudius, and he was probably an accomplice in
that emperor’s murder. But his fate was involved with that
of Agrippina. When Nero resolved to shake off the tyranny
of that awful woman, his first step was to remove the haughty
freedman from his offices.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiii. 14.</note> Pallas left the palace in the
second year of Nero’s reign. For seven years he lived on undisturbed.
But at last his vast wealth, which had become a
proverb, became too tempting to the spendthrift prince, and
Pallas was quietly removed by poison.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. 65; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxxv.;
D. Cass. 62. 14.</note>
</p>

<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>

<p>
The wealth of freedmen became proverbial, and the
fortunes of Pallas and Narcissus reached a figure hardly ever
surpassed even by the most colossal senatorial estates.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> ii. p. 55; Duruy,
v. p. 598; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. p. 192;
cf. Olympiod. <hi rend="italic">ap.</hi> Phot. § 44 (Müll.
<hi rend="italic">Frag. Hist. Gr.</hi> iv.).</note> The
means by which this wealth was gained might easily be inferred
by any one acquainted with the inner history of the times.
The manner of it may be read in the life of Elagabalus, whose
freedman Zoticus, the son of a cook at Smyrna, piled up vast
riches by levying a payment, each time he quitted the presence,
for his report of the emperor’s threats or promises or intentions.<note place="foot">Ael. Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Heliogab.</hi> x.; cf. Capitol.
<hi rend="italic">Anton. P.</hi> xi.; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xxviii.</note>
In the administration of great provinces, in the distribution of
countless places of trust, in the chaos of years of delation,
confiscation, and massacre, there must have been endless opportunities
for self-enrichment, without incurring the dangers
of open malversation. Statius extols the simple tastes and
frugality of his heroes Abascantus and Claudius Etruscus, and
yet he describes them as lavishing money on baths and tombs
and funeral pomp. The truth is that, as a mere matter of
policy, these wealthy aliens, who were never loved by a jealous
aristocracy, had to justify their huge fortunes by a sumptuous
splendour. The elder Pliny has commemorated the vapour
baths of Posides, a Claudian freedman, and the thirty pillars
of priceless onyx which adorned the dining saloon of Callistus.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxxi. 2; xxxvi. 12.</note>
A bijou bath of the younger Claudius Etruscus seems to have
been a miracle of costly beauty. The dome, through which a
brilliant light streamed upon the floor, was covered with scenes in
rich mosaic. The water gushed from pipes of silver into silver
basins, and the quarries of Numidia and Synnada contributed
the various colours of their marbles.<note place="foot">Statius, <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> i. 5, 36; Mart. vi.
42, et certant vario decore saxa.</note> The gardens of Entellus,
with their purple clusters which defied the rigours of winter,
seemed to Martial to outrival the legendary gardens of Phaeacia.<note place="foot">Mart. viii. 68.</note>
In the suburbs, hard by the Tiburtine way, rose that defiant
monument of Pallas, bearing the decree of the Senate, which
aroused the angry scorn of the younger Pliny.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
The life of one of these imperial slave ministers was a
strangely romantic career which has surely been seldom
matched in the history of human fortunes. Exposed and sold
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>in early youth in the slave markets of Smyrna, Delos, or
Puteoli, after an interval of ignominious servitude, installed
as groom of the chambers, thence promoted, according to his
aptitudes, to be keeper of the jewels, or tutor of the imperial
heir, still further advanced to be director of the post, or to a
place in the financial service, the freedman might end by
receiving the honour of knighthood, the procuratorship of a
province, or one of those great ministries which placed him in
command of the Roman world. Yet we must not deceive ourselves
as to his real position.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 75; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
6344.</note> To the very end of the Empire,
the fictions on which aristocratic power is largely based,
retained their fascination. In the fifth century a Senate, whose
ancestors were often originally of servile race, could pour their
scorn on the eunuch ministers of the East.<note place="foot">Claud. <hi rend="italic">In Eutrop.</hi> ii. 137.</note> And the decaying
or <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi> Senate of the Flavians had, when they were free
to express it, nothing but loathing for the reign of the freedmen.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 88.</note>
These powerful but low-born officials are a curious
example of what has been often seen in later times, the
point-blank refusal, or the grudging concession, of social
status to men wielding vast and substantial power. The
younger Pliny, in his Panegyric on Trajan, glories in the
preference shown under the new régime for young men of
birth, and in his letters he vents all the long-suppressed
scorn of his order for the Claudian freedmen. Even the
emperors who freely employed their services, were chary of
raising them to high social rank. Freedmen ministers were
hardly ever admitted to the ranks of the Senate<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xv. in curiam libertinorum
filios diu non admisit.</note>; they were
rarely present at its sittings, even at the very time when they
were governing the world. Sacerdotal and military distinctions
were seldom conferred upon any of them. They were
sometimes invested with the insignia of praetorian or quaestorian
rank.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 38; xii. 53.</note> A few were promoted to the dignity of knighthood,
Icelus, Asiaticus, Hormus, and Claudius Etruscus<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Galba</hi>, xiv.; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii.
57; iv. 39.</note>; but many
a passage in Martial or Juvenal seems to show that ordinary
equestrian rank was in those days a very doubtful distinction.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 29; v. 8, 14, 35, 23; cf.
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 212.</note>
The emperors, as raised above all ranks, might not
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>have been personally unwilling to elevate their creatures to
the highest social grade.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> c. xxviii.</note> But even the emperors, in matters
of social prejudice, were not omnipotent.
</p>

<p>
Still, the men who could win the favours of an Agrippina
and a Messalina, could not be extinguished by the most jealous
social prejudice. The Roman Senate were ready, on occasion,
to fawn on a Pallas or a Narcissus, to vote them money and
insignia of rank, nor did they always refuse them their
daughters in marriage. In the conflict which is so often seen
between caste pride and the effective power of new wealth,
the wealth and power not unfrequently prevail. The lex
Julia prohibited the union of freedmen with daughters of a
senatorial house.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Dig.</hi> xxiii. 2, 44.</note> Yet we know of several such marriages
in the first century. The wife of the freedman Claudius
Etruscus, was the sister of a consul who had held high
command against the Dacians.<note place="foot">Statius, iii. 3, 115.</note> Priscilla, the wife of
Abascantus, another minister of servile origin, belonged to
the great consular family of the Antistii. Felix, the brother
of Pallas, had married in succession three ladies of royal blood,
one of them the granddaughter of Cleopatra.<note place="foot">Id. v. 1, 53; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> v. 9; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xxviii. Felicem ... Judaeae
proposuit—trium reginarum maritum.</note>
</p>

<p>
The women of this class, for generations, wielded, in their
own way, a power which sometimes rivalled that of the
men. These plebeian Aspasias are a puzzling class. With
no recognised social position, with the double taint of servile
origin and more than doubtful morals, they were often
endowed with many charms and accomplishments, possessing
a special attraction for bohemian men of letters. Their
morals were the result of an uncertain social position, combined
with personal attractions and education. To be
excluded from good society by ignoble birth, yet to be more
than its equal in culture, is a dangerous position, especially for
women. Often of oriental extraction, these women were the
most prominent votaries of the cults or superstitions which
poured into Rome from the prolific East. Loose character
and religious fervour were easily combined in antiquity. And
the <hi rend="italic">demi-monde</hi> of those days were ready to mourn passionately
for Adonis and keep all the feasts of Isis or Jehovah, without
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>scrupling to make a temple a place of assignation.<note place="foot">Catull. x. 26; Tibull. i. 3, 33; Ov.
<hi rend="italic">Ars Am.</hi> iii. 635; cf. <hi rend="italic">Amor.</hi> i. 8, 73;
iii. 9, 33.</note> The
history of the early Empire, it has been rather inaccurately
said, shows no reign of mistresses. Yet some of the freedwomen
have left their mark on that dark page of history.
Claudius was the slave of women, and two of his mistresses
lent their aid to Narcissus to compass the ruin of Messalina.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 29.</note>
The one woman whom Nero really loved, and who loved him
in return, was Acte, who had been bought in a slave market
in Asia. She captured the heart of the Emperor in his early
youth, and incurred the fierce jealousy of Agrippina, as she
did, at a later date, that of the fair, ambitious Poppaea.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiii. 12, 46; xiv. 2; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>,
xxviii. Acten libertam paullum abfuit
quin justo matrimonio sibi conjungeret.</note>
Acte was faithful to his memory even after the last awful
scene in Phaon’s gardens.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, l.</note> And, along with his two nurses,
the despised freedwoman guarded his remains and laid the
last of his line beside his ancestors. Caenis, the mistress
who consoled Vespasian after his wife’s death, without
any attractions of youth or beauty, suited well the taste of
the bourgeois Emperor. It was a rather sordid and prosaic
union. And Caenis is said to have accumulated a fortune,
and besmirched the honest Emperor’s name, by a wholesale
traffic in State secrets and appointments.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxvi. 14.</note> In the last years
of our period a very different figure has been glorified by
the art of Lucian. Panthea, the mistress of L. Verus, completely
fascinated the imagination of Lucian when he saw
her at Smyrna, during the visit of her lover to the East.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Imag.</hi> 10. See Croiset’s <hi rend="italic">Lucien</hi>,
p. 273, on the <hi rend="italic">Imagines</hi> as illustrating
Lucian’s power as a critic of art.</note>
Lucian pictures her delicately chiselled beauty and grace of
form by recalling the finest traits in the great masterpieces
of Pheidias and Praxiteles and Calamis, of Euphranor and
Polygnotus and Apelles; Panthea combines them all. She
has a voice of a marvellous and mellow sweetness, which lingers
in the ear with a haunting memory. And the soul was worthy
of such a fair dwelling-place. In her love of music and
poetry, combined with a masculine strength of intellect capable
of handling the highest problems in politics or dialectic, she
was a worthy successor of those elder daughters of Ionia whose
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>charm and strength drew a Socrates or a Pericles to their feet.<note place="foot">Xen. <hi rend="italic">Mem.</hi> iii. 11; Plat. <hi rend="italic">Menex.</hi>
c. iv.</note>
Surrounded by luxury and the pomp of imperial rank, and
linked to a very unworthy lover, Panthea never lost her
natural modesty and simple sweetness.
</p>

<p>
The great freedmen, who held the highest offices in the
imperial service till the time of Hadrian with almost undisputed
sway, are interesting by reason of the strangely romantic
career of some of them. But these are very exceptional
cases. In the bureaux of finance, it has been discovered from
the inscriptions that the officials were all of equestrian rank.
On the other hand, a great number of the provincial procurators
were freedmen. And the agents of the Emperor’s
private fisc seem to have been nearly always drawn from
this class. The lower grades of the civil service were full
of them.<note place="foot">Cf. Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> i. 82.</note> But to the student of society, the official freedmen
are, as a class, not so interesting as their brethren who in
these same years were making themselves masters of the trade
and commercial capital of the Roman world. And the
interest is heightened by the vivid art with which Petronius
has ushered us into the very heart of this rather vulgar
society. The <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is to some extent a caricature. There
were hosts of modest, estimable freedmen whose only record is
in two or three lines on a funeral slab. Yet a caricature must
have a foundation of truth, and a careful reader may discover
the truth under the humorous exaggeration of Petronius.
</p>

<p>
The transition from the status of slave to that of freedman
was perhaps not so abrupt and marked as we might at first
sight suppose. It is probable that many a slave of the better
and more intelligent class found little practical change in the
tenor of his life when he received the touch of the wand
before the praetor. Some, like Melissus, the free-born slave
of Maecenas, actually rejected the proffered boon.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">De Ill. Gram.</hi> xxi.</note> There
was, of course, much cruelty to slaves in many Roman households,
and the absolute power of a master, unrestrained by
principle or kindly feeling, was an unmitigated curse till it
was limited by the humane legislation of the second century.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 189; Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées
Morales</hi>, ii. 208; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> xvii.</note>
But there must have been many houses, like that of the
younger Pliny, where the slaves were treated, in Seneca’s
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>phrase, as humble friends and real members of the family,
where their marriages were fêted with general gaiety,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 21; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47;
Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 17, 9; viii. 16; cf. Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 175.</note> where
their sicknesses were tenderly watched, and where they were
truly mourned in death. The inscriptions reveal to us a
better side of slave life, which is not so prominent in our
literary authorities. There is many an inscription recording
the love and faithfulness of the slave husband and wife,
although not under those honoured names. And it is
significant that on many of these tablets the honourable
title of <hi rend="italic">conjunx</hi> is taking the place of the old servile <hi rend="italic">contubernalis</hi>.
The inscriptions which testify to the mutual love
of master and servant are hardly less numerous. In one a
master speaks of a slave-child of four years as being dear to
him as a son.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2808.</note> Another contains the memorial of a learned
lady erected by her slave librarian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2874.</note> Another records the
love of a young noble for his nurse,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2816.</note> while another is the
pathetic tribute of the nurse to her young charge, who died
at five years of age. The whole city household of another
great family subscribe from their humble savings for an
affectionate memorial of their young mistress.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2862.</note> Seneca, in
his humanitarian tone about slavery, represents a great
moral movement, which was destined to express itself in
legislation under the Antonines. And the energy with which
Seneca denounced harsh or contemptuous conduct to these
humble dependents had evidently behind it the force of a
steadily growing sentiment. The master who abused his
power was already beginning to be a marked man.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Frequent manumissions were swelling the freedman class
to enormous dimensions. The emancipation of slaves by
dying bequest was not then, indeed, inspired by the same
religious motive as in the Middle Ages. But it was often
dictated by the natural, human wish to make some return to
faithful servants, and to leave a memory of kindness behind.
But without the voluntary generosity of the master, the slave
could easily purchase his own freedom. The price of slaves
varied enormously, according to their special aptitude and grade
of service. It might range from £1700, in rare cases, to £10,
or even less, in our money.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 174.</note> But taking the average price of
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>ordinary slaves, one careful and frugal might sometimes save
the cost of his freedom in a few years. The slave, especially if he
had any special gift, or if he occupied a prominent position in
the household, had many chances of adding to his <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi>.
But the commonest drudge might spare something from the
daily allowance of food.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 80, § 4, peculium suum
quod comparaverunt ventre fraudato
pro capite numerant.</note> Others, like the cooks in Apuleius,
might sell their perquisites from the remains of a banquet.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> x. 14; cf. Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel.
Rom.</hi> ii. 397.</note>
The door-keepers, a class notorious for their insolence in
Martial’s day,<note place="foot">v. 22, 10, negat lasso janitor esse
domi; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Nec. Inj.</hi> xiv. cubicularii
supercilium.</note> often levied heavy tolls for admission to their
master’s presence. And good-natured visitors would not
depart without leaving a gift to those who had done
them service. It must also be remembered that the slave
system of antiquity covered much of the ground of our
modern industrial organisation. A great household, or a
great estate, was a society almost complete in itself. And
intelligent slaves were often entrusted with the entire management
of certain departments.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">R. H.</hi> ii. 380 (Tr.)</note> The great rural properties had
their quarries, brickworks, and mines; and manufactures of all
kinds were carried on by servile industry, with slaves or
freedmen as managers. The merchant, the banker, the
contractor, the publisher, had to use, not only slave labour,
but slave skill and superintendence.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 162 sq.</note> The great household
needed to be organised under chiefs. And on rural estates,
down to the end of the Western Empire, the villicus or
procurator was nearly always a man of servile origin.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> ix. 30, 2; ii. 30, 2.</note> In
these various capacities, the trusted slave was often practically
a partner, with a share of the profits, or he had a
commission on the returns. Such a fortunate servant, by
hoarding his <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi>, might soon become a capitalist on his
own account, and well able, if he chose, to purchase his
freedom. His <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi>, like that of the son <hi rend="italic">in manu patris</hi>,
was of course by law the property of his master. But the
security of the <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi> was the security for good service.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. p. 163.</note>
Thus a useful and favourite slave often easily became a
freedman, sometimes by purchase, or, as often happened in
the case of servants of the imperial house, by the free gift of
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>the lord. There are even cases on record where a slave was
left heir of his master’s property. Trimalchio boasted that he
had been made by his master joint heir with the Emperor.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 76.</note>
</p>

<p>
The tie between patron and freedman was very close. The
emancipated slave had often been a trusted favourite, and even
a friend of the family, and his lord was under an obligation
to provide for his future. The freedman frequently remained
in the household, with probably little real change in his position.
His patron owed him at least support and shelter. But he
often gave him, besides, the means of an independent life,
a farm, a shop, or capital to start in some trade.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 165.</note> In the
time of Ovid, a freedman of M. Aurelius Cotta had more than
once received from his patron the fortune of a knight, besides
ample provision for his children.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 178, n.</note> A similar act of generosity,
which was recklessly abused, is recorded by Martial.<note place="foot">Mart. v. 70; cf. vii. 64.</note> By
ancient law, as well as by sentiment, senators were forbidden
to soil themselves by trade or usury.<note place="foot">Liv. xxi. 63, quaestus omnis patribus
indecorus visus; D. Cass. 69. 16;
cf. <hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> xiii. 1, 4; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Godefroy’s note.</note> But so inconvenient a
prohibition was sure to be evaded. And probably the most
frequent means of evasion was by entrusting senatorial capital
to freedmen or clients, or even to the higher class of slaves.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cat. Maj.</hi> 21.</note>
When Trimalchio began to rise in the social scale, he gave up
trade, and employed his capital in financing men of the freedman
class.<note place="foot">Petron. 77, sustuli me de negotiatione
et coepi libertos foenerare.</note> These people, generally of Levantine origin, had the
aptitude for commerce which has at all times been a characteristic
of their race. And, in the time of the Empire, almost all
trade and industry was in their hands. The tale of Petronius
reveals the secret of their success. They value money beyond
anything else; it is the one object of their lives. They frankly
estimate a man’s worth and character in terms of cash.<note place="foot">Id. 77, assem habeas, assem valeas.</note> Keen,
energetic, and unscrupulous, they will <q>pick a farthing out of a
dung-heap with their teeth</q>; <q>lead turns to gold in their hands.</q><note place="foot">Id. 43, paratus fuit quadrantem de
stercore mordicus tollere:—in manu
illius plumbum aurum fiebat.</note>
They are entirely of Vespasian’s opinion that gold from any
quarter, however unsavoury, <q>never smells.</q> Taking the world
as it was, in many respects they deserved to succeed. They
were not, indeed, encumbered with dignity or self-respect. They
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>had one goal, and they worked towards it with infinite industry
and unfailing courage and self-confidence. Nothing daunts or
dismays them. If a fleet of merchantmen, worth a large fortune,
is lost in a storm, the freedman speculator will at once sell his
wife’s clothes and jewels, and start cheerfully on a fresh venture.<note place="foot">Petron. 76.</note>
When his great ambition has been achieved, he enjoys its fruits
after his kind in all ages. Excluded from the great world of
hereditary culture, these people caricature its tastes, and imitate
all its vices, without catching even a reflection of its charm
and refinement. The selfish egotism of the dissipated noble
might be bad enough, but it was sometimes veiled by a careless
grace, or an occasional deference to lofty tradition. The selfishness
and grossness of the upstart is naked and not ashamed,
or we might almost say, it glories in its shame. Its luxury is
a tasteless attempt to vie with the splendour of aristocratic
banquets. The carver and the waiter perform their tasks to
the beat of a deafening music. Art and literature are prostituted
to the service of this vulgar parade of new wealth, and the
divine Homer is profaned by a man who thinks that Hannibal
fought in the Trojan War.<note place="foot">Id. 50</note> The conversation is of the true
bourgeois tone, with all its emphasis on the obvious, its unctuous
moralising, its platitudes consecrated by their antiquity.
</p>

<p>
It is this society which is drawn for us with such a sure,
masterly hand, and with such graceful ease, by Petronius.
The <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is well known to be one of the great puzzles and
mysteries in Roman literature. Scholars have held the most
widely different opinions as to its date, its author, and its purpose.
The scene has been laid in the reign of Augustus or of
Tiberius, and, on the strength of a misinterpreted inscription,
even as late as the reign of Alexander Severus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1175; cf. Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Lit.</hi> ii.
§ 300, n. 4.</note> Those who
have attributed it to the friend and victim of Nero have been
confronted with the silence of Quintilian, Juvenal, and Martial,
with the silence of Tacitus as to any literary work by
Petronius, whose character and end he has described with a
curious sympathy and care.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 18, 19.</note> It is only late critics of the
lower empire, such as Macrobius,<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 2, 8.</note> and a dilettante aristocrat
like Sidonius Apollinaris,<note place="foot">Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> ix. 268.</note> who pay any attention to this
    re<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>markable work of genius. And Sidonius seems to make its
author a citizen of Marseilles.<note place="foot">Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> xxiii. 155, et te
Massiliensium per hortos sacri stipitis,
Arbiter, colonum Hellespontiaco parem
Priapo, etc.</note> Yet silence in such cases may
be very deceptive. Martial and Statius never mention one
another, and both might seem unknown to Tacitus. And
Tacitus, after the fashion of the Roman aristocrat, in painting
the character of Petronius, may not have thought it relevant or
important to notice a light work such as the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>, even
if he had ever seen it. He does not think it worth while to
mention the histories of the Emperor Claudius, the tragedies of
Seneca, or the <hi rend="italic">Punica</hi> of Silius Italicus.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 8; xiii. 2; xv. 45,
60, 65; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 65.</note> Tacitus, like Thucydides,
is too much absorbed in the social tragedy of his time to
have any thought to spare for its artistic efforts. The rather
shallow, easy-going Pliny has told us far more of social life in
the reigns of Domitian and Trajan, its rural pleasures and its
futile literary ambitions, than the great, gloomy historian who was
absorbed in the vicissitudes of the deadly duel between the
Senate and the Emperors. One thing is certain about the author
of this famous piece—he was not a plebeian man about town,
although it may be doubted whether M. Boissier is safe in
maintaining that such a writer would not have chosen his own
environment of the Suburra as the field for his imagination.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 257, ce n’est
pas la coutume qu’on mette son idéal
près de soi.</note>
It is safer to seek for light on the social status of the author
in the tone of his work. The <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is emphatically the
production of a cultivated aristocrat, who looks down with
serene and amused scorn on the vulgar bourgeois world which he
is painting. He is interested in it, but it is the interest of the
detached, artistic observer, whose own world is very far off.
Encolpius and Trimalchio and his coarse freedman friends are
people with whom the author would never have dined, but
whom, at a safe social distance, he found infinitely amusing as
well as disgusting. He saw that a great social revolution
was going on before his eyes, that the old slave minion, with
estates in three continents, was becoming the rival of the great
noble in wealth, that the new-sprung class were presenting to
the world a vulgar caricature of the luxury in the palaces on
the Esquiline. Probably he thought it all bad,<note place="foot">Petron. 88, at nos vino scortisque
demersi ne paratas quidem artes audemus
cognoscere, sed accusatores antiquitatis vitia tantum docemus et discimus.
This rather applies to the higher cultivated class.</note> but the bad
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>became worse when it was coarse and vulgar. The ignorant
assumption of literary and artistic taste in Trimalchio must
have been contrasted in the author’s mind with many an
evening at the palace, when Nero, in his better moods, would
recite his far from contemptible verses, or his favourite passages
from Euripides, and when the new style of Lucan would be
balanced against that of the great old masters.<note place="foot">Petron. 118; cf. Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> 213.</note> And the man
who had been charmed with the sprightly grace of the stately
and charming Poppaea may be forgiven for showing his
hard contempt for Fortunata, who, in the middle of dinner,
runs off to count the silver and deal out the slaves’ share of
the leavings, and returns to get drunk and fight with one of
her guests.<note place="foot">Petron. 70, 67.</note>
</p>

<p>
The motive of the work has been much debated. It has
been thought a satire on the Neronian circle, and again an
effort to gratify it, by a revelation of the corruptions of the
plebeian world, the same impulse which drove Messalina to the
brothel, and Nero to range the taverns at midnight.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 115; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxvi.</note> It has
been thought a satire on the insolence and grossness of Pallas
and the freedmen of the Claudian régime which Nero detested,
to amuse him with all their vulgar absurdities. Is it not
possible that the writer was merely pleasing himself—that he
was simply following the impulse of genius? Since the
seventh century the work has only existed in fragments.<note place="foot">Teuffel. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Lit.</hi> § 300, n. 1.</note> Who
can tell how much the lost portions, if we possessed them,
might affect our judgment of the object of the work? One
thing is certain, its author was a very complex character, and
would probably have smiled at some of the lumbering efforts
to read his secret. Even though he may have had no lofty
purpose, a weary man of pleasure may have wished to display,
in its grossest, vulgarest form, the life of which he had tasted the
pleasures, and which he had seen turning into Dead Sea fruit.
He was probably a bad man in his conduct, worse perhaps in
his imagination; and yet, by a strange contradiction, which is
not unexampled in the history of character, he may have had
dreams of a refined purity and temperance which tortured and
embittered him by their contrast with actual life.
</p>

<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>

<p>
Out of the smoke of controversy, the conclusion seems
to have emerged that the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is a work of Nero’s reign,
and that its author was in all probability that Caius Petronius
who was Nero’s close companion, and who fell a victim to the
jealousy of Tigellinus. Not the least cogent proof of this is the
literary criticism of the work. It is well known that Lucan,
belonging to the Spanish family of the Senecas, had thrown
off many of the conventions of Roman literature, and
discarded the machinery of epic mythology in his <hi rend="italic">Pharsalia</hi>.
He had also incurred the literary jealousy of Nero. The
attack in the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> on Lucan’s literary aberrations can
hardly be mistaken. The old poet Eumolpus is introduced to
defend the traditions of the past. And he gives a not very
successful demonstration, in 285 verses, of the manner in which
the subject should have been treated, with all the scenery and
machinery of orthodox epic.<note place="foot">Petron. 118, 119; cf. Boissier,
<hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 239. Other proofs of the
date of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> are the occurrence
of names like Apelles and Menecrates,
c. 64, 73; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 33; <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>,
30; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 9; the
reflections on decline of oratory, <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi>
1; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Dial. Or.</hi> c. 35; the
invention of a peculiar glass, which
belongs to the reign of Tiberius, cf.
Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxxvi. 66; D. Cass. 57.
21 ad fin.</note> This specimen of conservative
taste is the least happy part of the work.
</p>

<p>
Such evidence is reinforced by the harmony of the whole
tone of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> with the clear-cut character of Petronius
in Tacitus. There was evidently a singular fascination about
this man, which, in spite of his wasted, self-indulgent life,
was keenly felt by the severe historian. Petronius was
capable of great things, but in an age of wild licence he
deliberately devoted his brilliant talent to making sensuality
a fine art. Like Otho, who belonged to the same circle,
he showed, as consul and in the government of Bithynia,
that a man of pleasure could be equal to great affairs.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 18, vigentem se
ac parem negotiis ostendit.</note> After
this single digression from the scheme of the voluptuary, he
returned to his pleasures, and became an arbiter in all questions
of sensual taste, from whose decision there was no appeal.
His ascendency over the Emperor drew upon him the fatal
enmity of Tigellinus. Petronius was doomed. It was a time
when not even the form of justice was used to veil the caprices
of tyranny, and Petronius determined not to endure a long
suspense when the issue was certain. He had gone as far as
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>Cumae to attend the Emperor. There he was stopped. He
retired to his chamber and had his veins alternately opened
and rebound, meanwhile conversing with his friends or listening
to light verses, not, as the fashion then was, seeking consolation
from a Stoic director on the issues of life and death. He
rewarded some of his slaves; others he had flogged before
his eyes. After a banquet he fell calmly into his last sleep
In his will there was none of the craven adulation by which
the victim often strove to save his heirs from imperial rapacity.
He broke his most precious myrrhine vase, to prevent its being
added to Nero’s treasures.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxxvii. 7 (20), T. Petronius
consularis moriturus invidia
Neronis, ... trullam myrrhinam
HS.c̅c̅c̅ emptam fregit.</note> His only bequest to the Emperor
was a stinging catalogue of his secret and nameless sins.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 19, sed flagitia principis
et novitatem cujusque stupri perscripsit
atque obsignata misit Neroni.</note>
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>, as we have it, is only a fragment, containing
parts of two books, out of a total of sixteen. It is full of
humorous exaggeration and wild Aristophanic fun, along with,
here and there, very subtle and refined delineation of character.
But, except in the famous dinner of Trimalchio, there are few
signs of regular construction or closeness of texture in plot
and incident. Even if we had the whole, it might have been
difficult to decipher its motive or to unlock the secret of the
author’s character. We can only be sure that he was a man
of genius, and that he was interested in the intellectual pursuits
and tendencies of his time, as well as in its vices and
follies. We may perhaps surmise that he was at once perverted
and disillusioned, alternately fascinated and disgusted
by the worship of the flesh and its lusts in that evil time.
He is not, as has been sometimes said, utterly devoid of
a moral sense. Occasionally he shows a gleam of nobler
feeling, a sense of the <hi rend="italic">lacrimae rerum</hi>, as in that passage
where the corpse of the shipwrecked Lichas is washed
ashore. <q>Somewhere a wife is quietly awaiting him, or
a father or a son, with no thought of storm; some one
whom he kissed on leaving.... He had examined the
accounts of his estates, he had pictured to himself the day of
his return to his home. And now he lies, O ye gods, how far
from the goal of his hopes. But the sea is not the only
mocker of the hopes of men. If you reckon well, there is
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>shipwreck everywhere.</q><note place="foot">Petron. 115, si bene calculum
ponas, ubique naufragium est.</note> There is also a curious note of contempt
for his own age in a passage on the decay of the fine
arts. The tone is, for the moment, almost that of Ruskin.
The glories of the golden age of art were the result of
simple virtue. An age like the Neronian, an age abandoned
to wine and harlotry, which dreams only of making money
by any sordid means, cannot even appreciate what the great
masters have left behind, much less itself produce anything
worthy. Even the gods of the Capitol are now honoured by
an offering of crude bullion, not by the masterpieces of a
Pheidias or an Apelles. And the race which created them
are now for us, forsooth, silly Greeklings!<note place="foot">Id. 88. For a favourable estimate
of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>, cf. Schiller’s
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. röm. Kaiserzeit</hi>, i. 469, 470.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet side by side with a passage like this, there are descriptions
of abnormal depravity so coarsely realistic that it has
often been assumed, and not unnaturally, that the writer rioted
in mere filth. It should be remembered, however, that there
was a tradition of immorality about the ancient romance,<note place="foot">See Boissier’s remarks, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p.
228.</note> and
Petronius, had he cared to do so, might have made the same
apology as Martial, that he provided what his readers
demanded.<note place="foot">Mart. v. 2; iii. 68; cf. Mahaffy,
<hi rend="italic">Greek World under Roman Sway</hi>, p.
298.</note> That Petronius was deeply tainted is only too
probable from his associations, although Tacitus implies that
he was rather a fastidious voluptuary than a gross debauchee.
Yet a sensualist of the intellectual range of Petronius may
have occasionally visions of a better world than that to which
he has sunk. Is it not possible that the gay elegant trifler
may sometimes have scorned himself as he scorned his time?
Is it not possible that, along with other illusions, he had
parted with the illusions of vice, and that in the <q>noctes
Neronis</q> he had seen the adder among the roses? He has
written one of the keenest satires ever penned on the vulgarity
of mere wealth, its absurd affectations, its vanity, its grossness.
May he not also have wished, without moralising in a fashion
which so cultivated a trifler would have scorned, to reveal the
abyss towards which a society lost to all the finer passions
of the spirit was hurrying? In the half comic, half ghastly
scene in which Trimalchio, in a fit of maudlin sentiment,
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>has himself laid out for dead, while the horns blare out his
funeral lament, we seem to hear the knell of a society which
was the slave of gold and gross pleasure, and seemed to be
rotting before its death.
</p>

<p>
But it need hardly be said that the prevailing note of the
<hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is anything but melancholy. The author is intensely
amused with his subject, and the piece is full of the most
riotous fun and humour. It belongs formally to the medley
of prose and verse which Varro introduced into Roman
literature on the model of Menippus of Gadara.<note place="foot">Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Lit.</hi> i. p. 239; Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 5.</note> It contains
disquisitions on literary tendencies of the day in poetry and
oratory, anecdotes and desultory talk. But Petronius has
given a new character to the old <q>Satura,</q> more in the
manner of the Greek romance. There probably was no regular
plot in the complete work, no central motive, such as the
wrath of Priapus,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 5.</note> to bind it together. Yet there is a certain
bond of union in the narrative of lively, and often questionable,
adventures through which Petronius carries his very disreputable
characters. In this life and movement, this human
interest, the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is the distant ancestor of <hi rend="italic">Gil Blas</hi>,
<hi rend="italic">Roderick Random</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">Tom Jones</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The scene of the earlier part, long since lost, may have been
laid at Massilia.<note place="foot">Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> ix. 268; xxiii.
155.</note> In the two books partially preserved to us, it
lies in southern Italy, at Cumae or Croton, in those Greek towns
which had plenty of Greek vice, without much Greek refinement.<note place="foot">Petron. 81, cf. Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena
Trim. Einl.</hi> 6. Puteoli is excluded
by the complaints of municipal decay
in c. 44: Naples, by the fact that
the town is a Roman colony (44, 57);
Cumae was the only town in this region
which had Praetors. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
1498, 2263; Petron. 65.</note>
The three strangers, whose adventures are related,
Encolpius, Ascyltus, and Giton, if we may judge by their
names, are also Greek, with the literary culture of their time,
and deeply tainted with its worst vices. At the opening of
our fragment, Encolpius, a beggarly, wandering sophist, is
declaiming in a portico on the decay of oratory.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 1, 2.</note> He is
expressing what was probably Petronius’s own judgment, as
it was that of Tacitus,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> c. 31, 35.</note> as to the evil effects of school
declamation on musty or frivolous subjects. He is met by a
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>rival lecturer, Agamemnon, who urges, on behalf of the
unfortunate teachers of this conventional rhetoric, that the
fault lies not with them, but with the parents and the public,
the same excuse, in fact, which Plato had long before made
for the maligned sophist of the fifth century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Rep.</hi> vi. p. 492 <hi rend="small">A.</hi></note> But
Encolpius and his companions, in spite of these literary
interests, are the most disreputable adventurers, educated
yet hopelessly depraved. They are even more at home
in the reeking slums than in the lecture hall. Encolpius has
been guilty of murder, theft, seduction. The party are
alternately plunderers and plundered. They riot for the
moment in foul excesses, and are tortured by jealousy and
the miseries of squalid vice. Only those who have a taste
for pornography will care to follow them in these dark paths.
Reduced to the last pinch of poverty, they are invited to dine
at the all-welcoming table of Trimalchio, and this is for us the
most interesting passage in their adventures. But, on leaving
the rich freedman’s halls they once more pass into scenes
where a modern pen cannot venture to follow them. Yet soon
afterwards, Encolpius is found in a picture gallery discussing
the fate of literature and art with Eumolpus,<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 83.</note> an inveterate
poet, as vicious as himself. Presently the party are on
shipboard off the south Italian coast. They are shipwrecked
and cast ashore in a storm near the town of Croton.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 114.</note> A
friendly peasant informs them that, if they are honest
merchants, that is no place for their craft. But if they
belong to the more distinguished world of intrigue, they may
make their fortune. It is a society which has no care for
letters or virtue, which thinks only of unearned gain. There
are only two classes, the deceivers and their victims. Children
are an expensive luxury, for only the childless ever receive an
invitation or any social attention. It is like a city ravaged by
the plague; there are only left the corpses and the vultures.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 116, nihil aliud est nisi
cadavera quae lacerantur aut corvi
qui lacerant.</note>
The adventurers resolve to seize the rare opportunity; they
will turn the tables on the social birds of prey. The pauper
poet is easily translated into a millionaire with enormous
estates in Africa.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 117.</note> A portion of his wealth has been engulfed
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>in the storm, but a solid HS.300,000,000, with much besides,
still remains. He has a cough, moreover, with other signs of
debility. There is no more idiotic person, as our Stock
Exchange records show, than a man eager for an unearned
fortune. The poor fools flocked around Eumolpus, drinking in
every fresh rumour about his will. He was loaded with gifts;<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 124.</note>
great ladies made an easy offer of their virtue and even that of
their children.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 140.</note> Meanwhile he, or Petronius, plays with their
follies or tortures their avidity. In one of his many wills, the
heirs of the pretended Croesus are required not to touch their
booty till they have devoured his remains before the people!<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 141.</note>
The tales of barbarian tribes in Herodotus, the memories of
the siege of Saguntum and Numantia, are invoked in brutal
irony to justify the reasonableness of the demand. <q>Close
your eyes,</q> the cynic enjoins, <q>and fancy that instead of
devouring human flesh, you are swallowing a million of
money.</q> Petronius could be very brutal as well as very
refined in his raillery. The combined stupidity and greed of
the fortune-hunter of all ages are perhaps best met by such
brutality of contempt.
</p>

<p>
The really interesting part of their adventure is the
dinner at the house of Trimalchio, a rich freedman, to which
these rascals were invited. Trimalchio is probably in many
traits drawn from life, but the picture of himself, of his
wife and his associates, is a work of genius worthy of Fielding
or Smollett or Le Sage. Petronius, it is clear, enjoyed his
work, and, in spite of his contempt for the vulgar ambition
and the coarseness and commonness of Trimalchio’s class, he
has a liking for a certain simplicity and honest good nature in
Trimalchio. The freedman tells the story of his own career<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 75, 76.</note>
without reserve, and with a certain pride in the virtue and
frugality, according to his standards, which have made him
what he is. He also exults in his shrewdness and business
capacity. His motto has always been, <q>You are worth just
what you have.</q> <q>Buy cheap and sell dear.</q> Coming as a
little slave boy from Asia, probably in the reign of Augustus,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> p. 7.
His cognomen Maecenatianus marks
him as a slave of the friend of Augustus
who died 8 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> Trimalchio would
therefore be born <hi rend="italic">circ.</hi> 18 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> (<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 71,
29, 75). He was perhaps over seventy
at the time of the dinner (<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 27, 77),
which may therefore be placed about
57 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi></note>
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>he became the favourite of his master, and more than the
favourite of his mistress. He found himself in the end the
real master of the household, and, on his patron’s death, he was
left joint-heir to his property with the emperor. But he had
ambitions beyond even such a fortune. He became a ship-owner
on a great scale. He lost a quarter of a million in a
single storm, and at once proceeded to build more and larger ships.
Money poured in; all his ventures prospered. He bought estates
in Italy, Sicily, and Africa. Some of his purchases he had never
seen.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 48.</note> He built himself a stately house, with marble porticoes,
four great banqueting-halls, and twenty sleeping-rooms.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 77.</note> Everything
to satisfy human wants was produced upon his lands. He
was a man of infinite enterprise. He had improved the breed
of his flocks by importing rams from Tarentum. He had bees
from Hymettus in his hives. He sent to India for mushroom
spawn.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 38, scripsit ut illi ex India
semen boletorum mitteretur.</note> A gazette was regularly brought out, full of statistics,
and all the daily incidents on his estates;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 53.</note> the number of slave
births and deaths; a slave crucified for blaspheming the genius
of the master; a fire in the bailiff’s house; the divorce of a watchman’s
wife, who had been caught in adultery with the bathman; a
sum of HS.100,000 paid into the chest, and waiting for
investment—these are some of the items of news. Trimalchio, who
bears now, after the fashion of his class, the good Roman name
of Caius Pompeius, has risen to the dignity of Sevir Augustalis
in his municipality;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 71; cf. Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.</hi> p.
308.</note> he is one of the foremost persons in it,
with an overwhelming sense of the dignity of wealth, and with
a ridiculous affectation of artistic and literary culture, which he
parades with a delightful unconsciousness of his blunders.
</p>

<p>
When the wandering adventurers arrive for dinner,<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 27.</note> they
find a bald old man in a red tunic playing at ball, with eunuchs
in attendance. While he is afterwards being rubbed down
with unguents in the bath, his servants refresh themselves
with old Falernian. Then, with four richly dressed runners
preceding him, and wrapped in a scarlet mantle, he is borne to
the house in his sedan along with his ugly minion. On the wall
of the vestibule, as you entered, there were frescoes, one of
which represented the young Trimalchio, under the leadership
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>of Minerva, making his entry into Rome, with other striking
incidents of his illustrious career, while Fortune empties her
flowing horn, and the Fates spin the golden thread of his
destiny.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 29.</note> The banquet begins; Alexandrian boys bring iced
water and delicately attend to the guests’ feet, singing all the
while.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 31.</note> Indeed, the whole service is accompanied by singing,
and the blare of instruments. To a great, deafening burst of
music, the host is at last borne in buried in cushions, his bare
shaven head protruding from a scarlet cloak, with a stole
around his neck, and lappets falling on each side; his hands
and arms loaded with rings.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 32.</note> Not being just then quite ready
for dinner, he, with a kindly apology, has a game of draughts,
until he feels inclined to eat, the pieces on the terebinthine
board being, appropriately to such a player, gold and silver
coins.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 33.</note> The dinner is a long series of surprises, on the artistic
ingenuity of which Trimalchio plumes himself vastly. One
course represents the twelve signs of the Zodiac, of which
the host expounds at length the fateful significance.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 35.</note>
Another dish was a large boar, with baskets of sweetmeats
hanging from its tusks. A huge bearded hunter pierced its
sides with a hunting knife, and forthwith from the wound
there issued a flight of thrushes which were dexterously captured
in nets as they flew about the room.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 40.</note> Towards the end
of the meal the guests were startled by strange sounds in the
ceiling, and a quaking of the whole apartment. As they raised
their eyes, the ceiling suddenly opened, and a great circular
tray descended, with a figure of Priapus, bearing all sorts of
fruit and bon-bons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 60; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 15,
laquearia ita coagmentat ... ut totiens
tecta quotiens fercula mutentur.</note> It may be readily assumed that in
such a scene the wine was not stinted. Huge flagons, coated
with gypsum, were brought in shoulder high, each with a label
attesting that it was the great Falernian vintage of Opimius,
one hundred years old.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 34; Cic. <hi rend="italic">Brut.</hi>, lxxxiii. The
Consulship of Opim. was <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> 121.</note> As the wine appeared, the genial
host remarked with admirable frankness, <q>I did not give as
good wine yesterday, although I had a more distinguished
company!</q>
</p>

<p>
The amusements of the banquet were as various, and some
of them as coarse or fantastic, as the dishes. They are gross
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>and tasteless exaggerations of the prevailing fashion. In a
literary age, a man of Trimalchio’s position must affect some
knowledge of letters and art. He is a ludicrous example of
the dogmatism of pretentious ignorance in all ages. He has a
Greek and Latin library,<note place="foot">Petron. 48; on private and public
libraries, cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. ix.; Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 8, § 2; ii. 17, § 8; iii. 7, § 7;
iv. 28, § 1; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Pers.</hi>; Luc. <hi rend="italic">Adv.
Indoct.</hi> 1, 16; Mart. vii. 17, 1; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">J. Caes.</hi> xliv.; <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xxix.; Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 114; Gregorov. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> (Tr.) p.
210; Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 220; Sid.
Apoll. ii. 9.</note> and pretends to have once read
Homer, although his recollections are rather confused. He
makes, for instance, Daedalus shut Niobe into the Trojan horse;
Iphigenia becomes the wife of Achilles; Helen is the sister of
Diomede and Ganymede.<note place="foot">Petron. 52.</note> One of the more refined entertainments
which are provided is the performance of scenes
from the Homeric poems, which Trimalchio accompanied by
reading in a sonorous voice from a Latin version.<note place="foot">Id. 59.</note> He is himself
an author, and has his poems recited by a boy personating
the Bacchic god.<note place="foot">Id. 41; cf. Epict. iii. 23; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
i. 13; iii. 18, 4; vi. 15; Mart. iii. 44,
45; 50.</note> As a connoisseur of plate he will yield to
no one,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Brev. Vit.</hi> xii. 2; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
3838; Mart. iv. 39; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> ii.
688: Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. 84.</note> although he slyly confesses that his <q>real Corinthian</q>
got their name from the dealer Corinthus. The metal came
from the fused bronze and gold and silver which Hannibal flung
into the flames of captured Troy. But Trimalchio’s most genuine
taste, as he naïvely confesses, is for acrobatic feats and loud
horn-blowing. And so, a company of rope-dancers bore the guests
with their monotonous performances.<note place="foot">Petron. 53.</note> Blood-curdling tales of
the wer-wolf, and corpses carried off by witches, are provided
for another kind of taste.<note place="foot">Id. 62, 63; cf. Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> i. 8.</note> A base product of Alexandria
imitates the notes of the nightingale, and another, apparently
of Jewish race, equally base, in torturing dissonant tones
spouted passages from the <hi rend="italic">Aeneid</hi>, profaned to scholarly ears by
a mixture of Atellan verses.<note place="foot">Petron. 68.</note> Trimalchio, who was anxious that
his wife should display her old powers of dancing a <hi rend="italic">cancan</hi>, is
also going to give an exhibition of his own gifts in the
pantomimic line,<note place="foot">Id. 52.</note> when the shrewd lady in a whisper warned
him to maintain his dignity. How far she preserved her
own we shall see presently.
</p>

<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>

<p>
The company at this strange party were worthy of their
host. And Petronius has outdone himself in the description
of these brother freedmen, looking up to Trimalchio as the
glory of their order, and giving vent to their ill-humour, their
optimism, or their inane moralities, in conversation with the
sly observer who reports their talk. They are all old slaves
like their host, men who have <q>made their pile,</q> or lost it.
They rate themselves and their neighbours simply in terms of
cash.<note place="foot">Petron. 38, 43.</note> The only ability they can understand is that which
can <q>pick money out of the dung-heap,</q> and <q>turn lead to
gold.</q><note place="foot">Id. 43, in manu illius plumbum
aurum fiebat.</note> These gross and infinitely stupid fellows have not
even the few saving traits in the character of Trimalchio. He
has, after all, an honourable, though futile, ambition to be a
wit, a connoisseur, a patron of learning. His luxury is
coarse enough, but he wishes, however vainly, to redeem it by
some ingenuity, by interspersing the mere animal feeding with
some broken gleams, or, as we may think, faint and distorted
reflections, of that great world of which he had heard, but the
portals of which he could never enter. But his company are
of mere clay. Trimalchio is gross enough at times, but,
compared with his guests, he seems almost tolerable. And
their dull baseness is the more torturing to a modern reader
because it is an enduring type. The neighbour of the Greek
observer warns him not to despise his company;<note place="foot">Id. 38, Collibertos ejus cave contemnas,
valde succosi sunt. <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.</hi> p. 223.</note> they are
<q>warm</q> men. That one at the end of the couch, who began
as a porter, has his HS.800,000. Another, an undertaker, has
had his glorious days, when the wine flowed in rivers;<note place="foot">Petron. 38.</note> but
he has been compelled to compound with his creditors, and he
has played them a clever trick. A certain Seleucus, whose
name reveals his origin, explains his objections to the bath,
especially on this particular morning, when he has been at a
funeral.<note place="foot">Id. 42.</note> The fate of the departed friend unfortunately leads
him to moralise on the weakness of mortal men, mere
insects, or bubbles on the stream. As for medical aid, it
is an imaginary comfort; it oftener kills than cures.<note place="foot">Id. 42, medicus nihil aliud est
quam animi consolatio. For similar
opinions of the medical profession, cf.
Petron. 56; D. Cass. lxix. 22, lxxi.
33; Mart. vi. 31; vi. 53; ii. 16; Epict.
iii. 23, § 27; Juv. iii. 77; Luc. <hi rend="italic">Philops.</hi>
c. 21, 26; <hi rend="italic">Adv. Indoct.</hi> c. 29; Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> ii. 779. Sen. gives a higher idea
of the craft, <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> vi. 16; cf. Apul.
<hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> x. 8, where the doctor rejects the
base proposals made to him.</note> The
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>great consolation was that the funeral was respectably done,
although the wife was not effusive in her grief.<note place="foot">Petron. 42, planetus est optime,
etiam si maligne illum ploravit uxor.</note> Another
guest will have none of this affected mourning for one who
lived the life of his choice and left his solid hundred thousand.<note place="foot">Id. 43.</note>
He was after all a harsh quarrelsome person, very different from
his brother, a stout, kindly fellow with an open hand, and a
sumptuous table. He had his reverses at first, but he was set
up again by a good vintage and a lucky bequest, which he knew,
by a sly stroke, how to increase; a true son of fortune, who
lived his seventy years and more, as black as a crow, a man
who lustily enjoyed all the delights of the flesh to the
very end.<note place="foot">Id. 43, noveram hominem olim
oliorum, et adhuc salax est. On the
phrase olim oliorum <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena
Trim.</hi> p. 237.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the most interesting person for the modern student is
the grumbler about the management of town affairs, and here a
page or two of the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> is worth a dissertation. The price
of bread has gone up, and the bakers must be in league with
the aediles. In the good old times, when the critic first came
from Asia, things were very different.<note place="foot">Petron. 44.</note> <q>There were giants in
those days. Think of Safinius, who lived by the old arch, a
man with a sharp, biting tongue, but a true friend, a man who,
in the town council, went straight to his point, whose voice in
the forum rang out like a trumpet. Yet he was just like one
of us, knew everybody’s name, and returned every salute. Why,
in those days corn was as cheap as dirt. You could buy for an
as a loaf big enough for two. But the town has since gone
sadly back.<note place="foot">Id. 44, haec colonia retroversus
crescit tanquam coda vituli. This
passage is used to prove that Puteoli
cannot be Trimalchio’s town. Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.</hi> p. 239.</note> Our aediles now think only how to pocket in
a day what would be to some of us a fortune. I know how a
certain person made his thousand gold pieces. If this goes on,
I shall have to sell my cottages. Neither men nor the gods
have any mercy. It all comes from our neglect of religion. No
one now keeps a fast, no one cares a fig for Jove. In old days
when there was a drought, the long-robed matrons with bare
feet, dishevelled hair, and pure hearts, would ascend the hill to
entreat Jupiter for rain, and then it would pour down in
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>buckets.</q><note place="foot">Petron. 44 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi> itaque statim
urceatim plovebat.</note> At this point the maundering, pious pessimist is
interrupted by a rag dealer<note place="foot">Id. 45. On the meaning of Centonarius
<hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> ii. 585. They
had a great number of Collegia, often
leagued with the Fabri; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Henz. Ind.</hi>
pp. 171-72; <hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> xiv. 8.</note> of a more cheerful temper. <q>Now
this, now that, as the rustic said, when he lost his speckled pig.
What we have not to-day will come to-morrow; so life rubs
along. Why, we are to have a three days’ show of gladiators
on the next holiday, not of the common sort, but many freedmen
among them. And our Titus has a high spirit; he will
not do things by halves. He will give us cold steel without
any shirking, a good bit of butchery in full view of the amphitheatre.
And he can well afford it. His father died and left
him HS.30,000,000. What is a paltry HS.400,000 to such a
fortune?<note place="foot">For the cost of such shows, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
81; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. <hi rend="italic">Suppl.</hi> p. 1034; Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> p. 58; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi>
ii. p. 136.</note> and it will give him a name for ever. He has some
tit-bits, too, in reserve, the lady chariot-driver, and the steward
of Glyco, who was caught with his master’s wife; poor wretch,
he was only obeying orders. And the worthless Glyco has
given him to the beasts; the lady deserved to suffer. And I
have an inkling that Mammaea is going to give us a feast, where
we shall get two denarii apiece. If she does the part expected
of her, Norbanus will be nowhere. His gladiators were a
wretched, weedy, twopenny-halfpenny lot, who would go down
at a mere breath. They were all cut to pieces, as the cowards
deserved, at the call of the crowd, <q>give it them.</q> A pretty
show indeed! When I applauded, I gave far more than I got.
But friend Agamemnon, you are thinking <q>what is all this
long-winded chatter.</q><note place="foot">Petron. 46, quid iste argutat molestus?</note> Well, you, who dote on eloquence, why
won’t you talk yourself, instead of laughing at us feeble folk.
Some day I may persuade you to look in at my farm; I daresay,
though the times are bad, we shall find a pullet to eat. And I
have a young scholar ripening for your trade. He has good
wits and never raises his head from his task. He paints with
a will. He has begun Greek, and has a real taste for Latin.
But one of his tutors is conceited and idle. The other is very
painstaking, but, in his excess of zeal, he teaches more than he
knows. So I have bought the boy some red-letter volumes,
that he may get a tincture of law for domestic purposes. That
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>is what gives bread and butter. He has now had enough of
literature. If he gives it up, I think I shall teach him a trade,
the barber’s or auctioneer’s or pleader’s,<note place="foot">Petron. 46 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi>; cf. Mart. v. 56;
Juv. vii. 5, 176.</note> something that only
death can take from him. Every day I din into his ears,
Primigenius, my boy, what you learn you learn for profit. Look
at the lawyer Philero. If he had not learnt his business, he
could not keep the wolf from the door. Why, only a little
ago, he was a hawker with a bundle on his back, and now he
can hold his own with Norbanus. Learning is a treasure, and
a trade can never be lost.</q>
</p>

<p>
To all this stimulating talk there are lively interludes. A
guest thinks one of the strangers, in a superior way, is making
game of the company, and assails him with a shower of the
choicest abuse, in malodorous Latin of the slums, interlarded
with proud references to his own rise from the slave ranks.<note place="foot">Petron. 57.</note>
Trimalchio orders the house-dog, Scylax, to be brought in, but
the brute falls foul of a pet spaniel, and, in the uproar, a lamp
is overthrown, the vases on the table are all smashed, and
some of the guests are scalded with the hot oil.<note place="foot">Id. 64.</note> In the
middle of this lively scene, a lictor announces the approach of
Habinnas, a stone-cutter, who is also a great dignitary of the
town. He arrives rather elevated from another feast of which
he has pleasant recollections. He courteously asks for
Fortunata,<note place="foot">Id. 67.</note> who happens to be just then looking after the
plate and dividing the remains of the feast among the slaves.
That lady, after many calls, appears in a cherry coloured
tunic with a yellow girdle, wiping her hands with her neckerchief.
She has splendid rings on her arms, legs, and fingers,
which she pulls off to show them to the stone-cutter’s lady.
Trimalchio is proud of their weight, and orders a balance to
be brought in to confirm his assertions. It is melancholy to
relate that, in the end, the two ladies get hopelessly drunk,
and fall to embracing one another in a rather hysterical fashion.
Fortunata even attempts to dance.<note place="foot">Id. 70.</note> In the growing confusion
the slaves take their places at table, and the cook begins to
give imitations of a favourite actor,<note place="foot">Id. Ephesum tragoedum coepit
imitare—Sonst unbekannt, Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena
Trim.</hi> 306.</note> and lays a wager with his
master on the chances of the green at the next races. Trimal<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>chio, who by this time was becoming very mellow and sentimental,
determines to make his will, and to manumit all his
slaves, with a farm to one, a house to another. He even gives
his friend the stone-cutter full directions about the monument
which is to record so brilliant a career. There is to be ample
provision for its due keeping, in the fashion so well known
from the inscriptions, with a fair space of prescribed measurements,
planted with vines and other fruit trees. Trimalchio
wishes to be comfortable in his last home.<note place="foot">Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4070, 7321; Petron.
71, valde enim falsum est vivo quidem
domos cultas esse, non curari eas ubi
diutius nobis habitandum est.</note> On the face of
the monument ships under full sail are to figure the sources
of his wealth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> the monument of C. Munatius
Faustus at Pompeii, <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 1030.
But Mau, p. 415 (Tr.), interprets it
differently from Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.</hi> p.
307.</note> He himself is to be sculptured, seated on
a tribunal, clothed with the <hi rend="italic">praetexta</hi> of the Augustalis,
with five rings on his fingers, ladling money from a bag,
as in the great banquet with which he had once regaled the
people.<note place="foot">See the monument of the surgeon
oculist of Assisi, <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2983, who records
the amount he gave for his freedom,
his benefactions, and his fortune. <hi rend="italic">v.
C.I.L.</hi> v. 4482, the monument of
Valerius Anteros Asiaticus, a Sevir
Aug. of Brescia.</note> On his right hand there is to be the figure of his
wife holding a dove and a spaniel on a leash. A boy is to
be graved weeping over a broken urn. And, finally, in
the centre of the scene, there is to be a horologe, that the
passer-by, as he looks for the hour, may have his eyes
always drawn to the epitaph which recited the dignities and
virtues of the illustrious freedman. It told posterity that
<q>C. Pompeius Trimalchio Maecenatianus was pious, stout, and
trusty, that he rose from nothing, left HS.30,000,000, and
never heard a philosopher.</q> The whole company, along with
Trimalchio himself, of course wept copiously at the mere
thought of the close of so illustrious a career. After renewing
their gastric energy in the bath, the company fell to another
banquet. Presently a cock crows, and Trimalchio, in a fit of
superstition, spills his wine under the table,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxvi. 2 (26); xxviii. 6
(57), plerique (suadent) anulum e sinistra
in longissimum dextrae digitum
transferre.</note> passes his rings to
the right hand, and offers a reward to any one who will bring
the ominous bird. The disturber was soon caught and handed
over to the cook for execution. Then Trimalchio excites his
wife’s natural anger by a piece of amatory grossness, and, in
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>retaliation for her very vigorous abuse, flings a cup at her
head. In the scene which follows he gives, with the foulest
references to his wife’s early history, a sketch of his own career
and the eulogy of the virtues that have made him what he is.<note place="foot">Petron. 75, ad hanc me fortunam
frugalitas mea perduxit.</note>
Growing more and more sentimental, he at last has himself
laid out for dead;<note place="foot">Id. 78; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi> xx.
3, where a similar scene is described.
Turannius—componi se in lecto et velut
exanimem a circumstante familia plangi
jussit.</note> the horn-blowers sound his last lament,
one of them, the undertaker’s man, with such a good will, that
the town watch arrived in breathless haste with water and axes
to extinguish a fire. The strangers seized the opportunity to
escape from the nauseous scene. Their taste raised them
above Trimalchio’s circle, but they were quite on the level of
its morals. Encolpius and his companions are soon involved
in other adventures, in which it is better not to follow them.
</p>

<p>
The lesson of all this purse-proud ostentation and
vulgarity, the moral which Petronius may have intended to
point, is one which will be taught from age to age by descendants
of Trimalchio, and which will be never learnt till a far off
future. But we need not moralise, any more than Petronius.
We have merely given some snatches of a work, which is now
seldom read, because it throws a searching light on a class
which was rising to power in Roman society. We have now
seen the worst of that society, whether crushed by the
tyranny of the Caesars, or corrupted and vulgarised by sudden
elevation from ignominious poverty to wealth and luxury.
But there were great numbers, both among the nobles and the
masses, who, in that evil time, maintained the traditions of old
Roman soberness and virtue. The three following chapters
will reveal a different life from that which we have hitherto
been describing.
</p>

<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>

</div></div>
    <div type="book" n="1" rend="page-break-before: right">        
        <pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>
<index index="toc" level1="Book II. Rara temporum felicitas"/><index index="pdf" level1="Book II. Rara temporum felicitas"/>
<head>BOOK II</head>

<head type="sub"><hi rend="italic">RARA TEMPORUM FELICITAS</hi></head>

<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
        
        <div type="chapter" n="1" rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
<index index="toc" level1="I. The circle of the younger Pliny"/><index index="pdf" level1="I. The circle of the younger Pliny"/>
<head>CHAPTER I</head>

<head type="sub">THE CIRCLE OF THE YOUNGER PLINY</head>

<p>
It is a great relief to turn from the picture of base and vulgar
luxury in the novel of Petronius to the sobriety and refinement
of a class which has been elaborately painted by a less skilful
artist, but a better man. The contrast between the pictures of
Petronius and those of Pliny, of course, raises no difficulty.
The writers belonged indeed to the same order, but they were
describing two different worlds. The difficulty arises when we
compare the high tone of the world which Pliny has immortalised,
with the hideous revelations of contemporary licence in
the same class which meet us in Juvenal, Martial, and Tacitus.
And historical charity or optimism has often turned the contrast
to account. But there is no need to pit the quiet testimony of
Pliny against the fierce invective of Juvenal. Indeed to do so
would indicate an imperfect insight into the character of the
men and the associations which moulded their views of the
society which surrounded them. The friends of Pliny were for
the most part contemporaries of the objects of Juvenal’s wrath
and loathing.<note place="foot">Some of Pliny’s older friends, the
elder Pliny, Quintilian, Spurinna, Verginius
Rufus, go back to the age which
Juvenal professes to attack (i. 170). But,
although Juvenal mentions few names
of his own generation, such as Isaeus,
Archigenes, and Marius Priscus, a
comparison between his subjects and those
of Martial shows that they were dealing
with the same social facts. Cf. Teuffel,
<hi rend="italic">R. Lit.</hi> ii. § 326, n. 5; Nettleship,
<hi rend="italic">Lectures and Essays</hi>, p. 124 sqq.</note> But although the two men lived side by side
during the same years, and probably began to write for the
public about the same date,<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> (Morel), p. 7; Peter,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 77; Nettleship, <hi rend="italic">Lectures
and Essays</hi>, 131.</note> there is no hint that they ever
met. They were socially at opposite poles; they were also as
widely separated by temperament. Pliny was a charitable, good-natured
man, an aristocrat, living among the <hi rend="italic">élite</hi>, with an
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>assured position and easy fortune—a man who, as he admits
himself, was inclined to idealise his friends.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 28.</note> He probably
shut his eyes to their moral faults, just as he felt bound in
honour to extol their third-rate literary efforts. Juvenal was,
as in a former chapter we have seen reason to believe, a
soured and embittered man, who viewed the society of the
great world only from a distance, and caught up the gossip of
the servants’ hall. With the heat of an excitable temperament,
he probably magnified what he heard, and he made
whole classes responsible for the folly and intemperance of a
few. Martial, the friend of Juvenal, lived in the same atmosphere,
but, while Juvenal was inspired by a moral purpose,
Martial caters, unabashed, for a prurient taste.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 68, 86; v. 2.</note> Both the
charitable optimist and the gloomy, determined pessimist, by
limiting their view, can find ample materials for their respective
estimates of pagan society towards the end of the first century.
A judicial criticism will combine or balance the opposing
evidence rather than select the witnesses.
</p>

<p>
The truth is that society in every age presents the most
startling moral contrasts, and no single comprehensive description
of its moral condition can ever be true. This has
been too often forgotten by those who have passed judgment
on the moral state of Roman society, both in the first age of the
Empire and in the last. That there was stupendous corruption
and abnormal depravity under princes like Caligula, Nero, and
Domitian, we hardly need the testimony of the satirists to
induce us to believe. That there were large classes among
whom virtuous instinct, and all the sober strength and gravity
of the old Roman character, were still vigorous and untainted,
is equally attested and equally certain. Ingenious immorality
and the extravagance of luxury were no doubt rampant in the
last century of the Republic and in the first century of the
Empire, and their enormity has been heightened by the perverted
and often prurient literary skill with which the orgies of
voluptuous caprice have been painted to the last loathsome
details. Yet even Ovid has a lingering ideal of womanly
dignity which may repel, by refined reserve, the audacity of
libertinism.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Amor.</hi> iii. 4, 2.</note> He was forced, by old-fashioned scruple or
imperial displeasure, to make an elaborate apology for the
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>lubricities of the <hi rend="italic">Ars Amandi</hi>.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Trist.</hi> ii. 212, 346, 353, Vita
verecunda est, Musa jocosa mihi; 497.</note> The most wanton writer of
the evil days shrinks from justifying adultery, and hardly ever
fails to respect the unconscious innocence of girlhood. In the
days when, according to Juvenal, Roman matrons were eloping
with gladiators, and visiting the slums of Rome, Tacitus and
Favorinus were preaching the duties of a pure motherhood.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> 28, non in cella emptae
nutricis sed gremio ac sinu matris
educabatur; A. Gell. xii. 1.</note>
In the days when crowds were gloating over the obscenities of
pantomime, and aristocratic dinner-parties were applauding the
ribaldry of Alexandrian songs, Quintilian was denouncing the
corruption of youth by the sight of their fathers toying with
mistresses and minions.<note place="foot">Quintil. i. 2, 4, 8; nostras amicas,
nostros concubinos vident.</note> In an age when matrons of noble rank
were exposing themselves at the pleasure of an emperor, the
philosopher Musonius was teaching that all indulgence, outside
the sober limits of wedlock, was a gross, animal degradation of
human dignity.<note place="foot">Stob. <hi rend="italic">Flor.</hi> vi. 61; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>,
xxvii.; cf. Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées Morales, etc.</hi>,
ii. p. 134.</note> And it is thus we may balance Juvenal and
Martial on the one side and Pliny on the other. The gloomy
or prurient satirist gives us a picture of ideal baseness; the
gentle and charitable aristocrat opens before us a society in which
people are charmingly refined, and perhaps a little too good.
Yet it is said with truth that an age should be judged by its
ideals of goodness rather than by its moral aberrations. And
certain it is that the age of Pliny and Tacitus and Quintilian
had a high moral ideal, even though it was also the age of
Domitian. The old Roman character, whatever pessimists,
ancient or modern, may say, was a stubborn type, which
propagated itself over all the West, and survived the
Western Empire. It is safe to believe that there was in Italy
and Gaul and Spain many a <hi rend="italic">grand seigneur</hi> of honest, regular
life, virtuous according to his lights, like Pliny’s uncle, or his
Spurinna, or Verginius Rufus, or Corellius. There were
certainly many wedded lives as pure and self-sacrificing as
those of the elder Arria and Caecina Paetus, or of Calpurnia
and Pliny.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 16; iii. 5; iv. 19; vi.
4; vii. 5.</note> There were homes like those at Fréjus,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi> 4.</note> or
Como, or Brescia,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 14.</note> in which boys and girls were reared in a
refined and severe simplicity, which even improved upon the
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>tradition of the golden age of Rome. And, as will be seen
in a later chapter, many a brief stone record remains which
shows that, even in the world of slaves and freedmen, there
were always in the darkest days crowds of humble people,
with honest, homely ideals, and virtuous family affection,
proud of their industries, and sustaining one another by help
and kindness.
</p>

<p>
In this sounder class of Roman society, it will be found
that the saving or renovating power was, not so much any
religious or philosophic impulse, as the wholesome influence,
which never fails from age to age, of family duty and affection,
reinforced, especially in the higher ranks, by a long tradition of
Roman dignity and self-respect, and by the simple cleanness and
the pieties of country life. The life of the blameless circle of
aristocrats which Pliny determined to preserve for the eyes of
posterity, seems to be sometimes regarded as the result of a
sudden transformation, a rebound from the frantic excesses of
the time of the Claudian Caesars to the simpler and severer
mode of life of which Vespasian set a powerful example. That
there was such a change of moral tone, especially in the
class surrounding the court, partly caused by financial exhaustion,
partly by the introduction of new men from the
provinces into the ranks of the Senate, is certified by the
supreme authority of Tacitus.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 55, sed praecipuus
adstricti moris auctor Vespasianus erat;
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> ix.; cf. Schiller, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Röm.
Kaiserz.</hi> ii. 506; Duruy, iv. 646; Renan,
<hi rend="italic">Les. Év.</hi> 140, 381; <hi rend="italic">L’Antéchr.</hi> 494.</note> Yet we should remember that
men like Agricola, the father-in-law of Tacitus, or Verginius
Rufus, or Fabatus, the grandfather of Pliny’s wife, or the
elder Pliny, and many another, were not converted prodigals.
They knew how to reconcile, by quietude or politic deference,
the dignity of Roman virtue with a discreet acquiescence even
in the excesses of despotism. The fortunes of many of them
remained unimpaired. The daily life of men like the elder
Pliny and Spurinna, is distinguished by a virtuous calm, an
almost painful monotony of habit, in which there seems to
have been nothing to reform except, perhaps, a certain moral
rigidity.<note place="foot">Pliny is pleased with the virtuous
monotony, <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. i. § 2, me autem ut
certus siderum cursus ita vita hominum
disposita delectat, senum praesertim;
cf. iii. 5.</note> Above all, and surely it is the most certain proof
and source of the moral soundness of any age, the ideal of
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>womanhood was still high, and it was even then not seldom
realised. There may have been many who justified the
complaint of moralists that mothers did not guard with
vigilant care the purity of their children. But there were
women of the circle of Tacitus and Pliny as spotless as the
half-legendary Lucretia, as they were far more accomplished,
and probably far more charming. It is often said that women
sink or rise according to the level of the men with whom they
are linked. If that be true, there must have been many good
men in the days of the Flavian dynasty.
</p>

<p>
The younger Pliny, whose name, before his adoption, was
Publius Caecilius Secundus,<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> (Morel), p. 32.</note> was descended from families which
had been settled at Como since the time of the first Caesar.<note place="foot">The Caecilii were probably established
at Como from 59 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>; cf. Catull.
35; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 30, 1; vii. 32, 1; vi.
24, 5; ix. 7; Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 33
(Morel).</note>
They belonged to the local aristocracy, and possessed estates
and villas around the lake. Pliny’s father, who had held high
municipal office, died early, but the boy had the great advantage
of the guardianship of Verginius Rufus, for whose
character and achievements his ward felt the profoundest
reverence.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 1; vi. 10.</note> That great soldier had been governor of Upper
Germany at the close of Nero’s reign, and, with a deference
to old constitutional principles, which Pliny must have
admired, had twice, at the peril of his life, refused to receive
the imperial place at the hands of his clamorous legions.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 8, 52; ii. 49.</note>
Pliny was born in 61 or 62 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, the time which saw the death
of Burrus, the retirement of Seneca from public life, and
the marriage of Nero with Poppaea.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 20, 5. He was in his
eighteenth year when the famous eruption
of Vesuvius took place 79 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, D.
Cass. lxvi. 21 sq.</note> His infancy therefore
coincided with the last and wildest excesses of the Neronian
tyranny. But country places like Como felt but little of the
shock of these moral earthquakes. There was no school in
Como till one was founded by Pliny’s own generosity.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 13, 3.</note> But
the boy had probably, in his early years, the care of his uncle,
the author of the <hi rend="italic">Natural History</hi>, who, during the worst
years of the Terror, was living, like many others, in studious
retirement on his estates.<note place="foot">Rendall, xiii. in Mayor’s ed. Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii.; Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> ii. 85 (199).</note> The uncle and nephew were men
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>of very different temperament, but there can be little doubt that
the character and habits of the older man profoundly influenced
the ideals of the younger. The elder Pliny would have
been an extraordinary character even in a puritan age; he
seems almost a miracle in the age of the Claudian Caesars.
He was born in 23 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, in the reign of Tiberius; and his early
youth and manhood cover the reigns of Caligula and Claudius.
He was only 32 when Nero came to the throne. He returned
to Rome in 71 to hold a high place in the councils of
Vespasian.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 5; <hi rend="italic">Hist. Nat. Praef.</hi>
3; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Plin.</hi> He was 56 at his
death in <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 79; cf. Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi>
i. 119, 420.</note> That more than monastic asceticism, that jealous
hoarding of every moment,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 5, § 13; Persius, who
was eleven years younger than the
elder Pliny, shows a character of the
same type, cf. Pers. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> ii. 71-74; iii.
66 sqq.; cf. Martha, <hi rend="italic">Les Moralistes
sous l’Emp.</hi> p. 131 sqq.</note> that complete indifference to
ordinary pleasures, in comparison with the duty, or the
ambition, of transmitting to future ages the accumulations
of learned toil, is a curious contrast to the Gargantuan
feasts or histrionic aestheticism which were the fashion in
the circle of the Claudian Emperors. The younger Pliny
has left us a minute account of his uncle’s routine of life,
and justly adds that the most intense literary toil might seem
mere idleness in comparison.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 5.</note> His studies often began soon
after midnight, broken by an official visit to the emperor
before dawn. After administrative work was over, the remainder
of the day was spent in reading or writing. Even
in the bath or on a journey, this literary industry was never
interrupted. A reader or amanuensis was always at hand
to save the moments that generally are allowed to slip away
to waste. He tells Titus in his preface that he had consulted
2000 volumes for his <hi rend="italic">Natural History</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Praef. H. N.</hi> § 17; cf. § 18, profecto
enim vita vigilia est.</note> The 160 volumes of
closely written notes, which the austere enthusiast could have
sold once for £3500, might have challenged the industry of a
Casaubon or a Mommsen.
</p>

<p>
The laborious intensity of the elder Pliny was probably
unrivalled in his day. But the moral tone, the severe self-restraint,
the contempt for the sensual, or even the comfortable,
side of life, the plain unspeculative stoicism, was a tone which,
from many indications in the younger Pliny and in the other
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>literature of the time, appears to have been not so rare as the
reader of Juvenal or Martial might suspect. A book like the
Caesars of Suetonius, concentrating attention on the life of the
emperor and his immediate circle, is apt to suggest misleading
conclusions as to the condition of society at large. The old
Roman character, perhaps the strongest and toughest national
character ever developed, was an enduring type, and its true
home was in the atmosphere of quiet country places in northern
or central Italy, where the round of rural labour and simple
pleasures reproduced the environment in which it first took
form. We have glimpses of many of these nurseries or
retreats of old-fashioned virtue in Pliny’s Letters. Brescia
and Padua, in the valley of the Po, were especially noted for
frugality and severity.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 14; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> iv.;
Juv. iii. 165.</note> And it was from among the youth of
Brescia that Pliny suggested a husband for the daughter of
the stoic champion, Arulenus Rusticus. There must have been
many a home, like those of Spurinna, or Corellius Rufus, or
Fabatus,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. i; ii. 7; i. 12; v. 11.</note> or the poet Persius, where, far from the weary conventionality
of the capital, the rage for wealth, the rush of
vulgar self-assertion, there reigned the tranquil and austere
ideal of a life dedicated to higher ends than the lusts of the
flesh, or the ghoul-like avarice that haunted death-beds.
There are youths and maidens in the portrait-gallery of Pliny
whose innocence was guarded by good women as pure and
strong as those matrons who nursed the stern, unbending
soldiers of the Samnite and Punic wars.<note place="foot">Cf. Pliny’s letter to Calpurnia’s
aunt, <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 19, quae nihil in contubernio
tuo viderit nisi sanctum honestumque;
cf. viii. 5; v. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
The great struggle in which the legions of the East and
West met again, and yet again, in the valley of the Po, probably
did not much disturb the quiet homes on lake Como.
The close of that awful conflict gave the world ten years of
quiet and reformation, which were a genial atmosphere for the
formation of many characters like Pliny’s. The reign of
the Flavians was ushered in by the mystery and glamour of
Eastern superstition, by oracles on Mount Carmel and miracles
at Alexandria.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 78; iv. 81.</note> But the plain Sabine soldier, who was the
saviour of the Roman State, brought to his momentous task
a clear unsophisticated good sense, with no trace of that
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>crapulous excitement which had alternated between the heroics
of spurious art and the lowest bohemianism. Vespasian,
although he was not a figure to strike the imagination, was
yet, if we think of the abyss from which, by his single
strength, he rescued the Rome world,<note place="foot">Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 746, 2364.</note> undoubtedly one of
the greatest of the emperors. And his biographer, with an
unusual tact, suggests what was probably one secret of his
strength. Vespasian regularly visited the old farmhouse at
Reate which was the cradle of his race. Nothing in the old
place was ever changed. And, on holidays and anniversaries
the emperor never failed to drink from the old silver goblet
which his grandmother had used.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> ii. locum incunabulorum
assidue frequentavit, manente
villa qualis fuerat olim, etc.</note> The strength and virtue of
the Latin race lay, not in religion or philosophy, but in the
family pieties and devotion to the State. Vespasian found it
urgent to bring order into the national finances, which had been
reduced to chaos by the wild extravagance of his predecessors,
and to recruit the Senate, which had been more than decimated
by proscription, confiscation, and vicious self-abandonment.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. ix.</note>
In performing his task, he did not shrink from the charge of
cheese-paring, just as he did not dread the unpopularity of
fresh taxation.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxvi. 8, Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xvi.,
cf. Meriv. vii. 274; cf. Schiller, <hi rend="italic">Gesch.
röm. Kaiserzeit</hi>, p. 515.</note> But he could be liberal as well as parsimonious.
He restored many of the ancient temples, even in
country places.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> lx.; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 746, sacr.
aedium restitutori, 1460, 1868, 2364,
D. Cass. lxvi. 10.</note> He made grants to senators whose fortunes
had decayed or had been wasted.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xvii.</note> He spent great sums on
colossal buildings and on amusements for the people.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xix.</note> But
the most singular and interesting trait in this remarkable man
is that, with no pretensions to literary or artistic culture, he
was the first Caesar who gave a fixed endowment to professors
of the liberal arts, and that he was the founder of that public
system of education<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xviii.;
    continued by Hadrian,
Spart. xvi.; by Ant. Pius, Capitol.
xi.; by Alex. Severus, Lamprid. xliv.;
cf. <hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> xiii. 3, 1, 2, 3; Eum. <hi rend="italic">Or.
pro Scholis</hi>, c. 11.</note> which, for good or evil, produced profound
effects on Roman character and intellect down to the end of the
Western Empire. His motive was not, as some have suggested,
to bring literature into thraldom to the State. He
was really making himself the organ of a great intellectual
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>movement. For, while the vast field of administration absorbed
much of the energy of the cultivated class, the decay
of free institutions had left a great number with only a
shadow of political interest, and the mass of unoccupied talent
had to find some other scope for its energies. It found it for
ages, till the end of the Western Empire, in fugitive and
ephemeral composition, or in the more ephemeral displays of
the rhetorical class-room.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Rom. Soc. in the Last Century
of the Western Empire</hi> (1st ed.), p. 355.</note> Vespasian perhaps did a greater
service in renovating the upper class of Rome by the introduction
of many new men from the provinces, to fill the
yawning gaps in senatorial and equestrian ranks. Spain contributed
more than its fair share to the literature and statesmanship
of this period.<note place="foot">Mommsen, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> (Tr.) i. p. 76.</note> And one of the best and most
distinguished sons of that province who found a career at
Rome, was the rhetor Quintilian.
</p>

<p>
The young Pliny, under his uncle’s care, probably came to
Rome not long after Quintilian entered on his career of twenty
years, as a teacher of rhetoric.<note place="foot">Pliny probably came to Rome
about 72 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> Rendall, xiv.; in Mayor’s
Pliny, <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii.; cf. Quintil. <hi rend="italic">Prooem.</hi> i.</note> While the elder Pliny was one of
Vespasian’s trusted advisers, and regularly visited the emperor
on official business before dawn, his nephew was forming his
taste and character under the greatest and best of Roman
teachers. Quintilian left a deep impression on the younger
Pliny.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 14, 10; vi. 6, 3;
vi. 32.</note> He made him a Ciceronian, and he fortified his
character. The master was one who believed that, in
education, moral influence and environment are even more
important than intellectual stimulus. He deplores the moral
risks to which the careless, self-indulgent parent, or the
corrupt tutor, may expose a boy in the years when the
destiny of a life is decided for better or worse. Intellectual
ambition is good. But no brilliancy of intellect will compensate
for the loss of the pure ingenuous peace of boyhood. This is
the faith of Quintilian, and it was also the faith of his pupil.<note place="foot">Quintil. <hi rend="italic">Inst. Or.</hi> i. 2, 6; cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
iii. 3, 4, cui in hoc lubrico aetatis non
praeceptor modo sed custos etiam rectorque
quaerendus est; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 13, 4,
ubi enim pudicius contineantur quam
sub oculis parentum; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Dial. de
Or.</hi> 28.</note>
And it may be that the teaching of Quintilian had a larger
share in forming the moral ideals of the Antonine age in the
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>higher ranks than many more definitely philosophic guides,
whose practice did not always conform to their doctrine.
</p>

<p>
Quintilian’s first principle is that the orator must be a good
man in the highest and widest sense, and, although he will not
refuse to borrow from the philosophical schools, he yet boldly
asserts the independence of the oratorical art in moulding the
character of the man who, as statesman or advocate, will have
constantly to appeal to moral principles.<note place="foot">Quintil. <hi rend="italic">Inst. Prooem.</hi> i. 9-11; ii.
2, 15; xii. 1, 1; xii. 7, 7, non convenit
ei, quem oratorem esse volumus,
injusta tueri scientem.</note> This tone, combined
with his own high example of seriousness, honour, and the purest
domestic attachment,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. <hi rend="italic">Prooem.</hi> 4.</note> must have had a powerful effect on the
flower of the Roman youth, who were his pupils for nearly a
generation. There are none of his circle whose virtues Pliny
extols more highly than the men who had sat with him on the
same benches, and who accompanied or followed one another
in the career of public office. One of the dearest of these
youthful friends was Voconius Romanus, who, besides being
a learned pleader, with a keen and subtle intellect, was gifted
with a singular social charm and sweetness of manner.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 13, hunc ego, cum
simul studeremus, arte familiariterque
dilexi, etc.</note>
Another was Cornutus Tertullus, who was bound to Pliny by
closer ties of sympathy than any of his friends, and for whose
purity of character he had a boundless admiration. They were
also united in the love and friendship of the best people of the
time.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> v. 14; <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 91, 92; cf.
Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 64.</note> They were official colleagues in the consulship, and in
the prefecture of the treasury of Saturn. For another academic
friend, Julius Naso, who had been his loyal supporter in all
his work and literary ambitions, he earnestly begs the aid of
Fundanus, to secure him official advancement.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 6.</note> Calestrius
Tiro, who rose to be proconsul of the province of Baetica, must
be included in this select company. He had served with Pliny
in the army of Syria, and had been his colleague in the
quaestorship; they constantly visited one another at their
country seats.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 16, 2; i. 10, 3; cf. Momms. p.
52. Pliny’s service with the iii. Gallica
was later than September, <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 81.</note> Such men, linked to one another by memories
of boyhood and by the cares of the same official career, must
have been a powerful and salutary element in social and
political life at the opening of the Antonine age.
</p>

<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>

<p>
It is a curious thing that, while Pliny lived in the closest
friendship with the Stoic opposition of Domitian’s reign, and
has unbounded reverence for its canonised saints, as we may
call them, he shows few traces of any real interest in speculative
philosophy. Indeed, in one passage he confesses that on such
subjects he speaks as an amateur.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 10, 4; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> iv.</note> He probably thought, like
his friend Tacitus, that philosophy was a thing to be taken
in moderation by the true Roman. It was when he was
serving on the staff in Asia that he formed a close friendship
with Artemidorus, whom Musonius chose for his daughter’s
hand.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 11, 5.</note> Pliny has not a word to say of his opinions, but he
extols his simplicity and genuineness—qualities, he adds, which
you rarely find in the other philosophers of the day. It was
at the same time that he formed a friendship with the Stoic
Euphrates. That philosopher, who is so studiously maligned
by Philostratus, was a heroic figure in Pliny’s eyes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 10; cf. Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
Tyan.</hi> v. 37, 40; vi. 8.</note> But what
Pliny admires in him is not so much his philosophy, as his
grave ornate style, his pure character, which showed none of that
harsh and ostentatious severity which was then so common in
his class. Euphrates is a polished gentleman after Pliny’s
own heart, tall and stately, with flowing hair and beard, a
man who excites reverence but not fear, stern to vice, but
gentle to the sinner. Pliny seems to have set little store by
the formal preaching of philosophy. In a letter on the uses
of sickness, he maintains that the moral lessons of the sick-bed
are worth many formal disquisitions on virtue.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 26, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet this man, apparently without the slightest taste for
philosophic inquiry, or even for the homilies which, in his
day, had taken the place of real speculation, had a profound
veneration for the Stoic martyrs, and, true gentleman as he was,
he risked his life in the times of the last Terror to befriend
them. It needed both nerve and dexterity to be the friend
of philosophers in those days. In that perilous year, 93 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>,
when Pliny was praetor,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 11, 2; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x.; D.
Cass. lxvii. 10; cf. Momms. p. 59,
where the date of Pliny’s praetorship
is fixed.</note> the philosophers were banished from
the city. Yet the praetor visited Artemidorus in his suburban
retreat, and, with his wonted generosity, he helped the philo<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>sopher to wipe out a heavy debt which he had contracted.
One of Pliny’s dearest friends was Junius Mauricus, the
brother of Arulenus Rusticus, who had been put to death by
Domitian for writing a eulogy on Thrasea the Stoic saint,
the champion of the higher life in Nero’s reign.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x.</note> Junius
Mauricus afterwards suffered exile himself in the same cause.
He had charged himself with the care of his martyred
brother’s children, and Pliny helped him to find a worthy
husband for the daughter of Rusticus.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 14; cf. iii. 11, 3.</note> With Fannia the
widow of Helvidius, and the daughter of Thrasea, Pliny’s
intimacy seems to have been of the closest kind. From her
he heard the tales, now too well worn, of the fierce firmness
of the elder Arria in nerving her husband Paetus for death,
and of her own determined self-immolation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 16; cf. vii. 19; ix. 13.</note> The mother of
Fannia, the younger Arria, when Thrasea her husband was
condemned to die in the reign of Nero, was only prevented
from sharing his fate by the most earnest entreaties of her
friends.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 34.</note> Fannia had followed Helvidius into exile in Nero’s
reign,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 19, 4; for the character
of Helvidius Priscus, cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 5.</note> and again under Vespasian, when the philosopher, with a
petulance very unlike the reserve of Thrasea, brought his fate
upon himself by an insulting disregard of the emperor’s
dignity as first magistrate of the State, if not by revolutionary
tendencies.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xv.; D. Cass. lxvi. 12;
cf. Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 98.</note> Fannia seems to have inherited many of the
great qualities of her father Thrasea, the noblest and the
wisest member of the Stoic opposition. He sprang from a
district in Lombardy which was noted for its soundness and
gravity of character. Unlike Paetus<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 16, 7.</note> and Helvidius, he never
defied or intrigued against the emperor, even when the
emperor was a Nero. And, though he belonged to the
austere circle of Persius, he did not disdain to sing in tragic
costume, at a festival of immemorial antiquity, in his native
Patavium.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 21; D. Cass. lxii. 26.</note> He performed his duties as senator with firm
dignity, and yet with cautious tact. His worst political crime,
and that which proved his ruin, was a severe reserve and a
refusal to join in the shameful adulation of the matricide
prince. He would not stoop to vote divine honours to the
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>adulteress Poppaea, and for three years he absented himself
from the Senate-house.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 12; xvi. 21, 22; cf.
D. Cass. 61. 15.</note> Yet, when the end came, he would
not allow the fiery Arulenus Rusticus to imperil his future,
by interposing his veto as tribune.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 26.</note> His daughter Fannia
was worthy of her illustrious descent. She showed all the
fearless defiance of the elder Arria, when she boldly admitted
that she had asked Senecio to write her husband’s life, and
she uttered no word to deprecate her doom. When all her
property was confiscated, she carried the dangerous volume with
her to her place of exile.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 19.</note> Yet this stern heroine had also
the tenderer virtues. She nursed her kinswoman Junia, one
of the Vestals, through a dangerous fever, and caught the seeds
of her own death from her charge. With all her masculine
firmness and courage, she had a sweetness and charm which
made her not less loved than venerated. With her may be
said to have expired the peculiar tradition of a circle which,
for three generations, and during the reigns of eight emperors,
guarded, sometimes with dangerous defiance, the old ideal of
uncompromising virtue in the face of a brutal and vulgar
materialism. It was the tradition which inspired the austere
detachment of the poetry of Persius, with its dim solemnity
and obscure depths, as of a sacred grove. These people were
hard and stern to vicious power,<note place="foot">Renan, <hi rend="italic">Les Évangiles</hi>, p. 142, treats
the philosophic opposition as a mere
aristocratic reaction; cf. pp. 287, 382.
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 103; Schiller,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. d. röm. Kaiserz.</hi> pp. 509, 536.</note> like our own Puritans of
the seventeenth century. Like them too, they were exclusive
and defiant, with the cold hauteur of a moral aristocracy, a
company of the elect, who would not even parley with evil,
for whom the issues of life and death were the only realities
in a world hypnotised by the cult of the senses and the spell
of tyranny. Their intense seriousness was a religion, although
they had only the vaguest and most arid conception of God,
and the dimmest and least comforting conception of any future
life. They seemed to perish as a little sect of troublesome
visionaries; and yet their spirit lived on, softened and sweetened,
and passed into the great rulers of the Antonine age.
</p>

<p>
Before his formal period of military service as tribune of the
3rd Gallic legion in Syria, Pliny had, in his nineteenth year,
entered on that forensic career which was perhaps the greatest
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>pride of his life.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 8, 8; Momms. p. 52.</note> He practised in the Centumviral court, which
was chiefly occupied with questions of property and succession.
Occasionally he speaks with a certain weariness of the trivial
character of the cases in which he was engaged. But his
general estimate is very different. The court is to him an
arena worthy of the greatest talent and industry,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 1; iv. 16; vi. 23, 2.</note> and the
successful pleader may win a fame which may entitle him to
take rank with the great orators of the past. Pliny, inspired
by memories of Quintilian’s lectures, has always floating before
him the glory of Cicero.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 20, 7.</note> He will prepare for publication a
speech delivered in an obscure case about a disputed will.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 33, 8-11.</note>
He is immensely proud of its subtlety and point, and the
sweep of its indignant or pathetic declamation, and he is not
unwilling to believe his legal friends who compared it with
the <hi rend="italic">De Corona</hi>! The suppression of free political life, the
absence of public interests, and the extinction of the trade of
the delator, left young men with a passion for distinction few
chances of gratifying it. The law courts at any rate provided
an audience, and the chance of momentary prominence. In the
Letters of Pliny, we can see the young advocate pushing his
way through the dense masses of the crowded court, arriving
at his place with torn tunic, holding the attention of his
audience for seven long hours, and sitting down amid the
applause even of the judges themselves.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 16.</note> Calpurnia often
arranged relays of messengers to bring her news of the
success, from point to point, of one of her husband’s speeches.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 19, 3. disponit qui nuntient
sibi quem assensum, quos clamores excitarim,
quem eventum judicii tulerim.</note>
Youths of the highest social rank—a Salinator, or a Ummidius
Quadratus—threw themselves eagerly into the drudgery which
might make an ephemeral name.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 11.</note> Ambitious pretenders,
with no talent or learning, and arrayed perhaps in hired purple
and jewels, like Juvenal’s needy lawyer, forced themselves
on to the benches of the advocates, and engaged a body of
claqueurs whose applause was purchased for a few denarii.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 14, 4.</note>
Pliny has such a pride in this profession, he so idealises what
must have been often rather humdrum work, that he feels a
personal pain at anything which seems to detract from the
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>old-fashioned, leisurely dignity of the court. In his day the
judges seem to have been becoming more rapid and business-like
in their procedure, and less inclined to allow the many
<hi rend="italic">clepsydrae</hi> which men of Pliny’s school demanded for the
gradual development of all their rhetorical artifices. He
regrets the good old times, when adjournments were freely
granted,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 2, 6.</note> and days would be spent on a case which was now
despatched in as many hours. It is for this reason that he
cannot conceal a certain admiration for Regulus, in other
respects, <q>the most detestable of bipeds</q> but who redeemed
his infamy by an enthusiasm and energy as an advocate
which rivalled even that of Pliny.
</p>

<p>
M. Aquilius Regulus, the prince of delators, and one of
the great glories of the Roman bar in Domitian’s reign, is a
singular figure. His career and character are a curious illustration
of the social history of the times. Regulus was the
son of a man who, in Nero’s reign, had been driven into exile
and ruined.<note place="foot">For the career and character of M.
Aquilius Regulus, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 42;
Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 5; i. 20, 15; ii. 11; ii.
20; iv. 2; vi. 2; and Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi>
p. 193.</note> Bold, able, recklessly eager for wealth and
notoriety at any cost, as a mere youth he resolved to raise
himself from obscure indigence, and soon became one of the
most capable and dreaded agents of the tyranny. He gained
an evil fame by the ruin of the great houses of the Crassi and
Orfiti. Lust of blood and greed of gain drove him on
to the wholesale destruction of innocent boys, noble matrons,
and men of the most illustrious race. The cruelty of Nero
was not swift enough to satisfy him, and he called for the
annihilation of the Senate at a stroke. He rose rapidly to
great wealth, honours were showered upon him, and, after a
prudent retirement in the reigns of Vespasian and Titus, he
reached the pinnacle of his depraved ambition under Vespasian’s
cruel son. He figures more than once in the poems of Martial,
and always in the most favourable light. His talent and
eloquence, according to the poet, were only equalled by his
piety, and the special care of the gods had saved him from
being buried under the ruins of a cloister which had suddenly
fallen in.<note place="foot">Mart. i. 13, 83, 112, Cum tibi
sit sophiae par fama et cura deorum,
etc.</note> He had estates at Tusculum, in Umbria and
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>Etruria.<note place="foot">Mart. vii. 31.</note> The courts were packed when he rose to plead.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 38; vi. 64, 11.</note>
Unfortunately, the needy poet furnishes a certain key to all
this flattery, when he thanks Regulus for his presents, and then
begs him to buy them back.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 16.</note> It is after Domitian’s death
that we meet Regulus in Pliny’s pages. The times are
changed, the delator’s day is over, and Regulus is a humbler
man. But he is still rich, courted, and feared; he is still a
great power in the law courts. With a weak voice, a bad
memory, and hesitating utterance,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 7, § 4.</note> by sheer industry and
determination he had made himself a powerful speaker, with a
style of his own, sharp, pungent, brutally incisive, ruthlessly
sacrificing elegance to point.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 20, 15; cf. references to the
archaic literary taste of the day in
Mart. v. 10.</note> He belonged to the new school,
and sometimes sneered at Pliny’s affectation of the grand
Ciceronian manner.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 12.</note> Yet to Pliny’s eyes, his earnest
strenuousness in his profession redeems some of his vices. He
insists on having ample time to develop his case.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 2, 5.</note> He appears
in the morning pale with study, wearing a white patch on his
forehead. He has consulted the diviners as to the success of
his pleadings.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 20.</note> It is a curious sign of the times that this
great advocate, who already possessed an enormous fortune,
was a legacy-hunter of the meanest sort. He actually visited,
on her death-bed, Verania, the widow of that Piso, the adopted
son of Galba, over whose murder Regulus had savagely gloated,
and by telling her that the stars promised a hope of recovery,
he obtained a place in her will. His mourning for his son displayed
all the feverish extravagance and grandiose eccentricity
of a true child of the Neronian age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 2.</note> The boy’s ponies and
dogs and pet birds were slaughtered over his pyre. Countless
pictures and statues of him were ordered. His memoir was
read by the father to a crowded audience, and a thousand
copies of it were sent broadcast over the provinces.<note place="foot">For the light which this throws on
the production of books in that age, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Haenny, <hi rend="italic">Schriftsteller u. Buchhändler</hi>, pp. 39-41.</note> In
Regulus we seem to see the type of character which, had
fortune raised him to the throne, would have made perhaps a
saner Caligula, and an even more eccentric Nero.
</p>
            
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>

<p>
The struggles of the law courts were idealised by Pliny, and
their transient triumphs seemed to him to match the glory of
the Philippics or the Verrines. Yet, to do him justice, Pliny
had sometimes a truer idea of the foundations of lasting fame.
The secret of immortality, the one chance of escaping oblivion,
is to leave your thought embalmed in choice and distinguished
literary form, which coming ages will not willingly let die.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 10, 4; iii. 7, 14, quatenus
nobis denegatur diu vivere, relinquamus
aliquid quo nos vixisse testemur;
v. 5, 4; v. 8, 2, me autem nihil
aeque ac diuturnitatis amor sollicitat;
cf. vii. 20.</note>
This, probably the only form of immortality in which Pliny
believed, is the great motive for literary labour. The longing
to be remembered was the most ardent passion of the Roman
mind in all ages and in all ranks, from the author of the
<hi rend="italic">Agricola</hi> to the petty artisan, who commemorated the homely
virtues of his wife for the eyes of a distant age, and made provision
for the annual feast and the tribute of roses to the tomb.
Of that immense literary ambition which Pliny represented,
and which he considered it a duty to foster, only a small part
has reached its goal. The great mass of these eager litterateurs
have altogether vanished, or remain as mere shadowy names in
Martial or Statius or Pliny.
</p>

<p>
The poems of Martial and Statius leave the impression that, in
the reign of Domitian, the interest in poetical literature was keen
and widely diffused, and that, besides the poets by profession,
there were crowds of amateurs who dabbled in verse. The <hi rend="italic">Silvae</hi>
transport us into a charming, if rather luxurious world, where men
like Atedius Melior or Pollius amuse themselves with dilettante
composition among their gardens and marbles on the bays of
Campania.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> ii. 2.</note> Martial has a host of friends similarly engaged,
and the versatility of some of them is suspiciously wide. An
old Ardelio is twitted by Martial with his showy and superficial
displays in declamation and history, in plays and epigrams,
in grammar and astronomy.<note place="foot">Mart. ii. 7; v. 30; iii 20; iv. 23;
v. 23. For the same breadth of
accomplishment in the fifth century,
cf. Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> v. 97; ii. 156;
xxiii. 101; <hi rend="italic">Rom. Soc. in the Last
Cent. of the Western Empire</hi> (1st ed.),
p. 375.</note> Canius Rufus, his countryman
from Gades, Varro, Bassus, Brutianus, Cirinius, have all an
extraordinary dexterity in almost every branch of poetical
composition. Martial is too keen a critic not to see the
fugitive character of much of this amateur literature. Like
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>Juvenal, he scoffs at the thin talent which concealed its feebleness
behind the pomp and faded splendour of epic or tragic
tradition.<note place="foot">Mart. vi. 60.</note> He roughly tells the whole versifying crowd that
genius alone will live in coming ages. The purchased applause
of the recitation hall merely gratifies for an hour the vanity of
the literary trifler. It is a pity for his fame that Martial did
not always maintain this tone of sincerity. He can at times
sell his flattery to the basest and most stupid. He is capable
of implying a comparison of the frigid pedantry of Silius
Italicus to the majesty of Virgil.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
Pliny was a friend and admirer of Martial, and, with his
usual generous hand, he made the poet a present when he
left Rome for ever to pass his last years at Bilbilis.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 21. This book is
dated by Mommsen 101 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> (<hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p.
14, Morel; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> App. C, p. 95); cf. Friedländer’s
<hi rend="italic">Martial</hi>, <q>Chronologie der
Epigr. Mart.</q> p. 66.</note> The
needy epigrammatist was only a distant observer, or hanger-on
of that world of wealth and refinement in which Pliny was
a conspicuous figure. But from both Pliny and Martial we
get very much the same impression of the literary movement
in the reign of Domitian. Pliny himself is perhaps its best
representative. He is a true son of the Roman schools, as
they had been revived and strengthened by Vespasian, for a life
of many generations. Pliny does not think slightly of the
literary efforts of his own day: some of them he even overrates.
But already the Roman mind had bent its neck to that thraldom
to the past, to that routine of rhetorical discipline, which,
along with other causes, produced the combination of ambitious
effort and mediocre performance that, for the last three centuries
of the Empire, is the characteristic of all literary culture.
From his great teacher Quintilian Pliny had imbibed a profound
reverence for Cicero.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 8, 4; v. 12, est mihi
cum Cicerone aemulatio.</note> Alike in his career of honours
and his literary pursuits, he loves to think that he is treading
in the great orator’s footsteps. In answer to a taunt of
Regulus, he once boldly avowed his preference for the Ciceronian
oratory to that of his own day. Demosthenes is also sometimes
his model, though he feels keenly the difference that
separates them.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 30.</note> Indeed his reverence for Greece as the
mother of letters, art, and civic life was one of Pliny’s sincerest
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>and most honourable feelings. To a man who had been
appointed to high office in Greece he preaches, in earnest tones,
the duty of reverence for that gifted race whose age was consecrated
by the memories of its glorious prime.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 24, reverere gloriam
veterem et hanc ipsam senectutem quae
in homine venerabilis, in urbibus sacra.</note> Pliny’s Greek
studies must have begun very early. At the age of fourteen
he had written a Greek tragedy, for which, however, he modestly
does not claim much merit.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 4, 2, Qualem? inquis.
Nescio; tragoedia vocabatur.</note> He had always a certain taste
for poetry, but it seems to have been merely the taste created
or enforced by the constant study of the poets under the
grammarian. Once, while detained by bad weather on his way
back from military service in Asia, he amused himself with
composing in elegiac and heroic verse.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 4, 3.</note> Later in his career, he
published a volume of poems in hendecasyllabic metre, written
on various occasions. But there was no inspiration behind
these conventional exercises. He was chiefly moved to write
in verse, as he naïvely confesses, by the example of the great
orators who beguiled their leisure in this way. Among his
published poems there were some with a flavour of Catullan
lubricity, which offended or astonished some of his severer
friends, who thought such doubtful lightness unworthy of a
grave character and a great position.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 14, cf. Ov. <hi rend="italic">Trist.</hi> ii. 365,
who makes pretty much the same
excuse to Augustus.</note> No better illustration
could be found of Pliny’s incorrigible conventionality in such
things than the defence which he makes of his suspected verses
to Titius Ariston.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 3.</note> It is to Pliny not a question of morals or
propriety. The ancient models are to be followed, not only
in their elevated, but in their looser moods. The case seems
to be closed when Pliny can point to similar literary aberrations
in a long line of great men from Varro and Virgil and Cicero
to Verginius Rufus and the divine Nerva.<note place="foot">Cf. Nettleship, <hi rend="italic">Lectures and Essays</hi>,
2nd Series, p. 39.</note>
</p>

<p>
Pliny, however, though vain of his dexterity in these trifles,
probably did not rate them very highly. It was to oratorical
fame that his ambition was directed. He was dissatisfied with
the eloquence of his own day, which, to use the words of
Regulus, sprang at the throat of its subject, and he avowed
himself an imitator of Cicero. His speeches, even for the
centumviral court, were worked up with infinite care, although
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>with too self-conscious an aim to impress an audience. We
can hardly imagine Cicero or Demosthenes coldly balancing
their tropes and figures after the fashion of Pliny. When the
great oratorical effort was over, the labour was renewed, in order
to make the speech worthy of the eyes of posterity. It was
revised and polished, and submitted to the scrutiny of critical
readers for suggestions of emendation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 13, 5; vii. 17.</note> Pliny was probably
the first to give readings of speeches to long-suffering friends.
We hear with a shudder that the recital of the <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi> was
spread over three days!<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 18; cf. ii. 19.</note> The other speeches on which Pliny
lavished so much labour and thought, have perished, as they
probably deserved to perish. The <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi> was preserved,
and became the parent and model of the prostituted rhetoric
of the Gallic renaissance in the fourth century.<note place="foot">Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">R. Lit.</hi> § 387; Mackail,
<hi rend="italic">Lat. Lit.</hi> p. 264; <hi rend="italic">Rom. Soc. in the Last
Cent. of the W. Empire</hi> (1st ed.), p. 357.</note> Pliny was
by no means a despicable literary critic, when he was not
paying the tribute of friendly flattery which social tyranny
then exacted. He could sometimes be honestly reserved in his
appreciation of a friend’s dull literary efforts.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 15.</note> But in his
ideals of oratory, he seems to be hopelessly wrong. There are
some terse and epigrammatic sentences in the <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi>, which
redeem it by their strong sincerity. But Pliny’s canons of
oratorical style would have excited the ridicule of his great
models, who were thinking of their goal, and not measuring
every pace as they strained towards it. Pliny’s theory that the
mere length of a speech is a great element in its excellence, that
swift directness is inartistic, that lingering diffuseness is an
oratorical charm, that laboured manufacture of turgid phrases
may produce the effect of the impetuous rush of Demosthenes
and Cicero in their moments of inspiration, makes us rather
glad, who love him, that we have not more of Pliny’s oratory.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1, 20. It is curious that this
praise of amplitude should be addressed
to Tacitus; cf. Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einleit.</hi>
xxxiv.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is by his letters that Pliny has lived, and will live on, so
long as men care to know the inner life of the great ages that
have gone before. The criticism, which is so quick to seize
the obvious weaknesses of the author of a priceless picture of
ancient society, seems to be a little ungrateful. We could forgive
almost any failing or affectation in one who had left us a
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>similar revelation of society when M. Aurelius was holding
back the Germans on the Danube, or when Probus was shattering
the invaders of the third century. The letters of Cicero
offer an apparently obvious comparison, which may be used
to the detriment of Pliny. Yet the comparison is rather
inept. Cicero was a man of affairs in the thick of a great
revolution, and his letters are invaluable to the student of
politics at a great crisis in history. But in the calm of
Trajan’s reign, a letter-writer had to seek other subjects of
interest than the fortunes of the state. Literature, criticism,
the beauties of nature, the simple charm of country life,
the thousand trivial incidents and eccentricities of an over-ripe
society in the capital of the world, furnished a ready
pen and a genial imagination, which could idealise its surroundings,
with ample materials. Pliny is by some treated as a
mediocrity; but, like our own Horace Walpole, he had the keen
sense to see that social routine could be made interesting, and
that the man who had the skill to do so might make himself
famous. He was genuinely interested in his social environment.
And intense interest in one’s subject is one great secret
of literary success. Pliny had also the instinct that, if a
work is to live, it must have a select distinction of style,
which may be criticised, but which cannot be ignored. He
had the laudable ambition to put his thoughts in a form of
artistic grace which may make even commonplace attractive.
So good a judge as the late Mr. Paley did not hesitate to
put the Latinity of Pliny on the level of that of Cicero.
Pliny’s Letters, perhaps even more than the masterpieces of
the Augustine age, fascinated the taste of the fourth and fifth
centuries. They were the models of Symmachus and Sidonius,
who tried, but in very different fashion, to do for their age
what Pliny did for his.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> v. 1, 7; Sidon. Apoll.
i. 1, 1; iv. 22, 2, ego Plinio ut
discipulus assurgo.</note>
</p>

<p>
Like his imitators, Sidonius and Symmachus, Pliny intended
his Letters to go down to the future as a masterpiece of style,
and as a picture of his age. We know that the letters of Symmachus
were carefully preserved in duplicate by his scribes,
probably by his own instructions, although they were edited
and published by his son only after his death.<note place="foot">Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 85. Seeck, <hi rend="italic">Prol.</hi> xlv.</note> Pliny, like
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>Sidonius, gave his Letters to the public in successive portions
during his life.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> (Tr.) p. 2; cf.
Haenny, <hi rend="italic">Schriftsteller</hi>, etc. p. 19.</note> Like Sidonius too, he felt that he had not
the sustained power to write a consecutive history of his time
and the Letters of both are probably far more valuable. Pliny’s
first book opens with a kind of dedication to Septicius Clarus,
who was the patron of Suetonius, and who rose to be praetorian
prefect under Hadrian.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 1; vii. 28; i. 15; viii.
1; Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 87.</note> Pliny appears to disclaim any
order or principle of arrangement in these books, but this
is the device of an artistic negligence. Yet it has been
proved by the prince of European scholars in our day that
both as to date and subject matter, Pliny’s Letters reveal
signs of the most careful arrangement. The books were
published separately, a common practice down to the end of
Roman literary history. The same subject reappears in the
same book or the next.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 4.</note> Groups of letters dealing with the
same matter are found in their natural order in successive
books. The proof is made even clearer by the silence or
the express references to Pliny’s family relations. Finally, the
older men, who fill the stage in the earlier Letters, disappear
towards the end; while a younger generation, a Salinator or a
Ummidius Quadratus, are only heard of in the later. Men of
Pliny’s own age, like Tacitus or Cornutus Tertullus, meet us
from first to last. The dates at which the various books were
published have been fixed with tolerable certainty. It is
enough for our present purpose to say that the earliest letter
belongs to the reign of Nerva, and the ninth book was probably
given to the world a year or two before the writer was appointed
by Trajan to the office of imperial legate of Bithynia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> pp. 7, 24; Teuffel, § 335, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is easy, as we have said, and apparently congenial to
some writers, to dwell on the vanity and self-complacency of
the writer of these letters. By some he seems to be regarded
chiefly as a <hi rend="italic">poseur</hi>. To discover the weaknesses of Pliny is
no great feat of criticism: they are on the surface. But
<q>securus judicat orbis terrarum,</q> and Pliny has borne the
scrutiny of the great judge. Men of his own race and age,
who spoke and wrote the most finished Latin, awarded him
the palm of exquisite style.  But Pliny has many qualities of
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>the heart, which should cover a multitude of sins, even more
serious than any with which he is charged. He had the great
gift of loyal friendship, and he had its usual reward in a
multitude of friends. It has been regretted that Pliny does
not deal with serious questions of politics and philosophy,
that his Letters rather skim the surface of social life, and
leave its deeper problems untouched. Pliny himself would
probably have accepted this criticism as a compliment. The
mass of men are little occupied with insoluble questions.
And Pliny has probably deserved better of posterity by leaving
us a vivid picture of the ordinary life of his time or of his
class, rather than an analysis of its spiritual distresses and
maladies. We have enough of that in Seneca, in M. Aurelius,
and in Lucian. Of the variety and vividness of Pliny’s
sketches of social life there can never be any question. But
our gratitude will be increased if we compare his Letters with
the collections of his imitators, Symmachus and Sidonius, whose
arid pages are seldom turned by any but a few curious and
weary students. Martial, in his way, is perhaps even more
clear-cut and minute in his portraiture. But Martial is essentially
a wit of the town, viewing its vices, follies, and fashions
with the eye of a keen, but rather detached observer. In
reading Pliny’s Letters, we feel ourselves introduced into the
heart of that society in its better hours; and, above all, we seem
to be transported to those quiet provincial towns and secluded
country seats where, if life was duller and tamer than it was
in the capital, the days passed in a quiet content, unsolicited
by the stormier passions, in orderly refinement, in kindly
relations with country neighbours, and amid the unfading
charm of old-world pieties and the witchery of nature.
</p>

<p>
Pliny has also done a great service in preserving a memorial
of the literary tone and habits of his time. Even in that
age of fertile production and too enthusiastic appreciation,
Pliny, like Seneca and Statius, has a feeling that the love
for things of the mind was waning.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 18, 5; viii. 12, literarum
senescentium reductor; Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi>
i. Prooem.; <hi rend="italic">Petron.</hi> 88; cf. Sidon. Apoll.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 8; ii. 14; vii. 15; ii. 10, 1.</note> And he deemed it
an almost religious duty, as Symmachus and Sidonius did
more than three centuries after him, to arouse the flagging
interest in letters, and to reward even third-rate literary
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>effort with exuberant praise. He avows that it is a matter
of duty to admire and venerate any performance in a field
so difficult as that of letters.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 17, § 5.</note> Yet Pliny was not by any
means devoid of critical honesty and acumen. He could
be a severe judge of his own style. He expects candid
criticism from his friends, and receives it with gratitude and
good temper.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 17; v. 12.</note> This is to him, indeed, the practical purpose of
readings before final publication. He made emendations and
excisions in the Histories of Tacitus, which the great author
had submitted for his revision.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 20; viii. 7.</note> In his correspondence with
Tacitus, there is a curious mixture of vanity along with a clear
recognition of his friend’s immense superiority of genius, and
a sure prescience of his immortal fame. He is proud to hear
their names coupled as chiefs of contemporary literature,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 20; ix. 23, ad hoc illum
<q>Tacitus es an Plinius?</q></note>
and he cherishes the hope that, united by loyal friendship
in life, they will go down together to a remote future.
When, in the year 106, Tacitus had asked him for an account
of the elder Pliny’s death, in the great eruption of Vesuvius,
Pliny expressed a firm belief that the book on which Tacitus
was then engaged was destined to an enduring fame.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 16, 2.</note> He
was not quite so confident as to the immortality of Martial’s
work,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 21, 6, at non erunt aeterna
quae scripsit; non erunt fortasse; ille
tamen scripsit tanquam essent futura.</note> although he appreciates to the full Martial’s brilliant and
pungent wit. On the other hand, writing to a friend about the
death of Silius Italicus, he frankly recognises that the Epic of
the Punic War is a work of industry rather than of genius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 7, scribebat carmina majore
cura quam ingenio.</note> Yet
he cannot allow the author of this dull mechanical poem to
pass away without some record of his career.<note place="foot">Mart. vii. 63; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 65.</note> The death at
seventy-five of the last surviving consular of the Neronian
age, of the consul in whose year of office the tyranny of Nero
closed, inspired a feeling of pathos which was probably genuine,
in spite of the rather pompous and pedantic expression of it.
And although he wrote the <hi rend="italic">Punica</hi>, a work which was almost
buried till the fifteenth century,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">R. Lit.</hi> § 315, n. 5,
    and the opinions collected by Mayor, <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> iii. p. 120.</note> Silius was probably a not
uninteresting person. He had been a delator under Nero, and
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>had enjoyed the friendship of Vitellius, but he knew how to
redeem his character under the Flavian dynasty, and he had
filled the proconsulate of Asia with some credit.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 7, 3.</note> Henceforth
he enjoyed the lettered ease and social deference which were
the privilege of his class for centuries. He retired finally
to the shores of Campania, where, moving from one villa to
another, and surrounding himself with books and gems of
art, his life flowed away undisturbed by the agony of Rome
in the last terror of the Caesars. Among his many estates
he was the proud owner of one of Cicero’s villas, and of the
ground where Virgil sleeps. He used to keep the great poet’s
birthday with a scrupulous piety, and he always approached
his tomb as a holy place. This apparently placid and fortunate
life was, like so many in those days, ended by a voluntary
death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Mayor, <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> iii. p. 114, for a
learned note on suicide in the early
Empire.</note> Silius Italicus, in his life and in his end, is a true type
of a generation which could bend before the storm of despotism,
and save itself often by ignominious arts, which could recover
its dignity and self-respect in the pursuit of literary ideals,
and, at the last, assert the right to shake off the burden of
existence when it became too heavy.
</p>

<p>
Pliny’s theory of life is clearly stated in the Letters, and it
was evidently acted on by a great number of the class to which
he belonged.<note place="foot">Pliny, <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 23, 3. For a similar
ideal in the fifth century, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Roman
Society in the Last Century of the
Western Empire</hi>, p. 165 (1st ed.).</note> The years of vigorous youth should be given to
the service of the state, in pursuing the well-marked and carefully-graduated
career of honours, or in the strenuous oratorical
strife of the law courts. The leisure of later years might be
portioned out between social duty, the pleasures or the cares
of a rural estate, and the cultivation of literary taste by reading
and imitation of the great masters. The last was the most
imperious duty of all, for those with any literary gifts, because
charm of style gives the one hope of surviving the wreck of
time;<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 8, § 1.</note> for mere cultivated facility, as the most refined and
creditable way of filling up the vacant spaces of life. Even if
lasting fame was beyond one’s reach, it was something to be
able to give pleasure to an audience of cultivated friends at
a reading, and to enjoy the triumph of an hour. There must
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>have been many a literary coterie who, if they fed one another’s
vanity, also encouraged literary ideals, and hinted gentle criticism,<note place="foot">For a good example cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
iii. 15.</note>
in that polite delicacy of phrase in which the Roman
was always an adept. One of these literary circles stands out
in Pliny’s pages. At least two of its members had held great
office. Arrius Antoninus, the maternal grandfather of the
Emperor Antoninus Pius,<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi> 1.</note> had twice borne the consulship
with antique dignity, and shown himself a model governor as
proconsul of Asia.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 3.</note> He was devoted to Greek literature, and
seems to have preferred to compose in that language. We
need not accept literally Pliny’s praises of his Atticism, and
of the grace and sweetness of his Greek epigrams. But he
seems to have had a facility which Pliny tortured his ingenuity
in vain to imitate with the poorer resources of the Latin
tongue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 18; cf. viii. 4.</note> Among the friends of Antoninus was Vestricius
Spurinna, who had defended Placentia for Otho, who was
twice consul under Domitian, and was selected by Trajan to
command the troops in a campaign in Germany.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 11; ii. 18, 36; Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 5; ii. 7; iii. 1, scribit et
quidem utraqua lingua, lyra doctissima.
Spurinna was 77, at the date of
this letter, <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 101-102; Momms. p. 11.</note> This dignified
veteran, who had passed apparently untainted through the
reigns of the worst emperors, varied and lightened the ordinary
routine of his old age by the composition of lyrics, both in
Greek and Latin, which seemed to his admirers to have a
singular sweetness. Sentius Augurinus, a familiar friend of
the two consulars, was also a brilliant verse writer,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 27; cf. ix. 8.</note> who could
enthral Pliny by a recitation lasting for three days, although
the fact that Pliny was the subject of one of the poems may
account for the patience or the pleasure. One of Pliny’s
dearest friends was Passennus Paullus, who claimed kindred
with the poet Propertius, and, at any rate, came from the
same town in Umbria. Passennus has been cruelly treated by
Time, if his lyric efforts recalled, as we are asked to believe,
the literary graces of his ancestor, and even those of Horace.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 15; ix. 22.</note>
Vergilius Romanus devoted himself to comedy, and was thought
to have reproduced not unworthily the delicate charms of
Menander and Terence, as well as the scathing invective of older
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>Greek masters of the art.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 21.</note> But there were others of Pliny’s
circle who essayed a loftier and weightier style. Probably the
foremost of these was Titinius Capito, who, as an inscription
records,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 798; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 801. He was
Secretary (ab Epistulis) under Domitian,
Nerva, and Trajan; cf. Macé,
<hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, pp. 91, 93, 115.</note> had held high civil office under Domitian, Nerva, and
Trajan. He was an enthusiastic patron of letters, and readily
offered his halls to literary friends for their recitations, which
he attended with punctilious politeness. Cherishing the
memory of the great men of the Republic, the Cassii, the
Bruti, and the Catos, he composed a work on the death of the
noble victims of the Terror.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 17; viii. 12. Cf. C.
Fannius, who wrote a history of the
victims of Nero, Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 5. He
died <hi rend="italic">circ.</hi> 106, Macé, p. 82.</note> He tried in vain to draw Pliny
into the field of historical composition.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 8. For similar unwillingness,
cf. Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 22.</note> But the man who
thought more of style and graceful charity than of truth, was
not the man to write the history of such a time. He has done
a much greater service in providing priceless materials for the
reconstruction of its social history. Caninius Rufus was a
neighbour of Pliny at Como.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 3.</note> He was one of those for whom
the charms of country life had a dangerous seduction. His
villa, with its colonnades, <q>where it was always spring,</q> the
shining levels of the lake beneath his verandah, the water
course with its emerald banks, the baths and spacious halls,
all these delights seem to have relaxed the literary energy and
ambition of their master. Caninius meditated the composition
of a Greek epic on the Dacian wars of Trajan.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. 4; ix. 33.</note> But he was
probably one of those lingering, dilatory writers who meet us in
Martial,<note place="foot">Mart. iv. 33; vi. 14.</note> waiting for the fire from heaven which never comes.
The intractable roughness of barbarian names, which, as Pliny
suggests, might have been eluded by a Homeric licence in
quantity, was probably not the only difficulty of Caninius.
</p>

<p>
Among the literary friends of Pliny, a much more important
person than Caninius was Suetonius, but Suetonius was
apparently long paralysed by the same cautious hesitation to
challenge the verdict of the public. A younger man than
Pliny,<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 13, puts his birth
in 77 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>; but cf. Macé, p. 35, who
places it in the year 69; see too Peter,
<hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. 67. The indications
in Suet. are <hi rend="italic">Domit.</hi> xii.; <hi rend="italic">Ill. Gramm.</hi>
iv.; <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, lvii.</note> Suetonius was one of his most intimate friends. They
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>both belonged to that circle which nursed the senatorial tradition
and the hatred of the imperial tyrants.<note place="foot">Macé, p. 83; Peter, ii. 69; cf.
Krause, <hi rend="italic">De Sueton. Fontibus.</hi></note> The life of
Suetonius was not very effectual or brilliant, from a worldly
point of view. Although born within the rank to which every
distinction was open,<note place="foot">For the authorities, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Macé, p. 29.</note> he was a man of modest and retiring
tastes, devoted to quiet research, and destitute of the eager
ambition and vigorous self-assertion which are necessary for
splendid success. He was probably for some years a professor
of grammar.<note place="foot">From 97 to 101 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> pp. 53-57.</note> He made a half-hearted attempt to gain a footing
at the bar. In 101 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> he obtained a military tribunate,
through Pliny’s influence, but speedily renounced his command.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 8.</note>
Henceforth he devoted himself entirely to that historical
research, which, if it has not won for him any dazzling
fame, has made historical students, in spite of some reservations
as to his sources, his debtors for all time. Pliny had the
greatest esteem for Suetonius, and was always ready to befriend
him, whether it were in the purchase of a quiet little
retreat near Rome,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 24; of the year 97. On the
meaning of <hi rend="italic">contubernalis</hi>, Suetonius
being 28, and Pliny 35 years of age, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Macé, p. 50.</note> or in obtaining for the childless antiquary
the <hi rend="italic">Jus trium liberorum</hi> from Trajan.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 94; cf. Macé, p. 50.</note> The two men were
bound to one another by many tastes and sympathies, not the
least strong being a curious superstition, which infected, as we
shall see in a later chapter, even the most vigorous minds of
that age. Suetonius had once a dream which seemed to
portend failure in some legal cause in which he was engaged.
He sought the aid of Pliny to obtain an adjournment. Pliny
does not question the reality of such warnings, but merely
suggests a more cheering interpretation of the vision.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 18.</note>
Although devoted to research, and a most laborious student,
the biographer of the Caesars was strangely tardy in letting his
productions see the light. In 106, he had been long engaged
on a work, which was probably the <hi rend="italic">De Viris Illustribus</hi>.<note place="foot">Macé, p. 68; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 10;
Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 18.</note> Pliny
assailed him with bantering reproaches on his endless use of
the file, and begs him to publish without delay. From several
indications, it appears that the lingering volume did not appear
till 113.<note place="foot">Macé, p. 69.</note> It was not till the year 118, when Hadrian arrived
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>from the East after his accession, that Suetonius attained the
rank of one of the imperial secretaryships.<note place="foot">Macé, p. 90. For the disgrace of
Suetonius, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> xi. 2.</note> Pliny in all probability
had died some years before the elevation of his friend.
</p>

<p>
But although the dawn of a new age of milder and less
suspicious government had, for the first time since Augustus,
left men free to compose a true record of the past, and even
to vilify the early Caesars,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 53.</note> the great mass of cultivated men
in Pliny’s time, as in the days of Ausonius and Sidonius, were
devoted to poetry. The chief cause in giving this direction to
the Roman mind was undoubtedly the system pursued in the
schools. In the first century, as in the fifth, the formative
years of boyhood were devoted almost entirely to the study of
the poets. The subject-matter of their masterpieces was not
neglected by the accomplished grammarian, who was often
a man of learning, and sometimes a man of taste; and the
reading of poetry was made the text for disquisitions on
geography and astronomy, on mythology or the antiquities
of religious ritual and constitutional lore.<note place="foot">See <hi rend="italic">Roman Society in the Last
Century of the Western Empire</hi>, p. 348
sq. (1st ed.).</note> But style
and expression were always of foremost interest in these
studies. The ear of the South has always felt the charm of
rhythmical or melodious speech, with a keenness of pleasure
generally denied to our colder temperament. And the Augustan
age had, in a single generation, performed miracles, under
Greek inspiration, in moulding the Latin tongue to be the
apt vehicle of every mood of poetic feeling. That inspired
band of writers, whose call it was to glorify the dawn of a
world-wide empire and the ancient achievements of the Latin
race,<note place="foot">Virg. <hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> vi. 848 sq.</note> rose to the full height of their vocation. They were
conscious that they were writing for distant provinces won
from barbarism, and for a remote posterity.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Trist.</hi> iv. 128; Hor. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> ii.
20; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p. 299.</note> They discovered
and revealed resources in the language, hitherto undreamt of.
They wedded to its native dignity and strength a brilliancy,
an easy grace and sprightliness, which positively ravished the
ear of the street boys in Pompeii, or of the rude dweller on
the Tanais or the Baetis.<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi> (Tr.), 486, 488;
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 4967.</note> In his own lifetime Virgil became
a popular hero. His Eclogues were chanted on the stage;
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>verses of the Aeneid can still be seen, along with verses of
Propertius, scrawled on the walls of Campanian towns. Virgil,
when he visited Rome, was mobbed by admiring crowds. When
his poetry was recited in the theatre, the whole audience rose
to their feet as if to salute the emperor.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> 13, auditis in theatro
Virgilii versibus surrexit universus
populus, etc.</note> He had the doubtful
but significant honour of being recited by Alexandrian boys at
the coarse orgies of a Trimalchio.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 68.</note> Never was a worthy fame
so rapidly and splendidly won: seldom has literary fame and
influence been so lasting.
</p>

<p>
The Flavian age succeeded to this great heritage. Already
there were ominous signs of a decay of originality and force, of
decadence in the language itself.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 18, 4; viii. 12, 1;
cf. Seneca’s complaints of his time,
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 23; 100; Petron. 83-4.</note> The controversy between
the lovers of the new and the lovers of the archaic style was
raging in the reign of Vespasian, and can be still followed in
the <hi rend="italic">De Oratoribus</hi> of Tacitus, or even in the verses of Martial.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Dial. de Or.</hi> 20; Mart. v. 10;
cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> 86, Cacozelos et antiquarios,
ut diverso genere vitiosos, pari
fastidio sprevit; Pers. i. 69 sq.; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 114. For Hadrian’s preference of
Ennius to Virgil, etc., <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi>
c. 16; A. Gell. xii. 2; Macé, p. 96;
Martha, <hi rend="italic">Les Moralistes sous l’Empire
Rom.</hi> p. 184.</note>
Already the taste for Ennius and the prae-Ciceronian oratory had
set in, for the dialect of the heroes of the Punic Wars, even for
<q>the Latin of the Twelve Tables,</q><note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 114, § 13, duodecim tabulas
loquuntur.</note> a taste which was destined
to produce its Dead Sea fruit in the age of the Antonines. But
whoever might cavil at Cicero,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Dial. de Or.</hi> 20.</note> no one ever questioned the
pre-eminence of Virgil, and he and his contemporaries were
still the models of a host of imitators. The mass of facile
talent, thrown back on itself by the loss of free republican
life and public interests, fascinated from earliest infancy by
the haunting cadences of the grand style, rushed into verse-writing,
to beguile long hours of idleness, or to woo a shadowy
fame at an afternoon recital, with a more shadowy hope of
future fame. The grand style was a charmer and deceiver. It
was such a perfect instrument, it was so protean in its various
power, it was so abundant in its resources, that a man of third-rate
powers and thin commonplace imagination, who had been
trained in skilful manipulation of consecrated phrase, might
for the moment delude himself and his friends by faint echoes
of the music of the golden age.
</p>

<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>

<p>
The brilliancy of inherited phrase concealed the poverty of
the literary amateur’s fancy from himself. And, even if he
were not deluded about his own powers, the practice in skilful
handling of literary symbols, which was acquired in the schools,
furnished a refined amusement for a too ample leisure. It is
clear from the dialogue <hi rend="italic">De Oratoribus</hi>, and from Pliny’s Letters,
that the meditative life, surrounded by the quiet charm of stream
and woodland, far from the din and strife and social routine of
the great city,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">De Or.</hi> 12.</note> attracted many people much more than the
greatest oratorical triumphs in the centumviral court, which,
after all, were so pale and bourgeois beside the glories of the
great ages of oratory. And although Aper, in the Dialogue of
Tacitus, sneers at the solitary and unsocial toil of the poet,
rewarded by a short-lived <hi rend="italic">succès d’estime</hi>,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 9, 10.</note> there can be no
doubt that the ambition to cut a figure, even for a day, was
a powerful inspiration at a time when the ancient avenues to
fame had been closed.
</p>

<p>
It was to satisfy such ambitions that Domitian founded the
quinquennial competition on the Capitol, in the year 86 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> iv.</note>
as well as the annual festival in honour of Minerva on the
Alban Mount. A similar festival, for the cultivation of Greek
poetry, had been established at Naples in honour of Augustus,
at which Statius had won the crown of corn-ears.<note place="foot">Stat. v. 3, 225; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi>
xi. A Greek comedy in honour of
Germanicus was performed.</note> And Nero
had founded another, apparently only for his own glorification.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ner.</hi> xii. Suetonius says it
was the first of the kind. It was
called <q>Neronia.</q></note>
The festival established by Domitian was more important and
enduring. The judges were taken from the priestly colleges,
and, amid a concourse of the highest functionaries of the state,
the successful poet received his crown at the hands of the
emperor. The prospect of such a distinction drew competitors
from distant provincial parts. It is a curious illustration of
the power and the skill of the literary discipline of the schools
that, twice within a few years, the crown of oak leaves was
won by boys under fourteen years of age. The verses of one
of them may still be read upon his tomb.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2603, to L. Val. Pudens,
erected by his fellow-citizens in <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>
110. He was only 13. <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Teuffel,
§ 314, n. 4; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p.
324.</note>
</p>

<p>
But these infrequent chances of distinction could not suffice
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>for the crowd of eager composers. In those days, although the
bookselling trade was extensive and vigorous, there was no
organised publishing system by which a new work could be
brought to the notice of the public.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 2; ix. 11, 2; Mart.
vii. 8. Cf. Haenny, <hi rend="italic">Schriftst. u. Buchh.</hi>
ii. p. 24 sqq.</note> The author had to
advertise himself by giving readings, to which he invited his
friends, and by distributing copies of his book. The mania
for recitation was the theme of satirists from the days of
Horace to the days of Epictetus.<note place="foot">Epict. iii. 23, § 11.</note> Martial comically describes
the frenzied poet torturing his friends day and night, pursuing
them from the bath to the dining-room, and spreading a
solitude around him.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 44, 45; iv. 81.</note> Juvenal congratulates his friend on
escaping to the country from the hoarse reciter of a frigid
Theseid.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 2; iii. 9.</note> In the bohemian scenes of Petronius, the inveterate
versifier, who will calmly finish a passage, after being cast
ashore from a shipwreck, makes himself a nuisance by his
recitations in the baths and porticoes of Croton, and is very
properly stoned by a crowd of street boys.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 90, 91, 115.</note> No aspect of
social life is more prominent in the Letters of Pliny than the
reading of new works, epics, or lyrics, histories, or speeches,
before fashionable assemblies. A liberal patron like Titinius
Capito would sometimes lend a hall for the purpose. But the
reciter had many expenses, from the hire of chairs to the
fees to freedmen and slaves, who acted as <hi rend="italic">claqueurs</hi>. In
the circle of a man like Pliny, to attend these gatherings was
a sacred duty both to letters and to friendship. In a year
when there was a more than usually abundant crop of poets,
the eager advocate could boast that he had failed no one, even
in the month when the courts were busiest.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 13; ii. 19; iv. 5;
27; v. 12; vi. 17, 21; viii. 21.</note> Doubtless, many
of the fashionable idlers, who dawdled away their time in the
many resorts devoted to gossip and scandal, were glad to show
themselves in the crowd. Old friends would consider it a
duty to support and encourage the budding literary ambition
of a young aspirant of their set. Some sincere lovers of
literary art would be drawn by a genuine interest and a wish
to maintain the literary tradition, which was already betraying
signs of weakness and decay. But, to a great many, this duty,
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>added to the endless round of other social obligations, was
evidently becoming repulsive and wearisome.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 17.</note> Pliny could
listen with delight and admiration to Sentius Augurinus
reciting his poems for three long days.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 27.</note> He would calmly
expect his own friends to listen for as many days to a whole
volume of his poems, or to his <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi> on Trajan.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 18; iv. 5.</note> Such was
his high breeding, his kindliness, and such was his passion for
literature in any form or of any quality, that he could hardly
understand how what to him seemed at once a pleasure and
duty should be regarded by others as an intolerable nuisance.
The conduct of such people is treated with some disdain in
one or two of the rare passages in which he writes of his
circle with any severity. Some of these fashionable folk,
after lingering in some place of gossip until the reading was
well advanced, would enter the hall with ostentatious reluctance,
and then leave before the end. Others, with an air
of superiority, would sit in stolid silence and disguise the
slightest expression of interest. This seemed to Pliny, not
only grossly bad manners, but also neglect of a literary duty.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 13, 2; vi. 17; viii. 12, 1.</note>
The audience should not only encourage honest effort;
they should contribute their judgment to the improvement
of style. Pliny, like Aristotle, has an immense faith in the
collective opinion of numbers, even in matters of artistic
taste.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii 17, 7, quia in numero
ipso est quoddam magnum conlatumque
consilium. Cf. Arist. <hi rend="italic">Pol.</hi> iii. 11,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διὸ καὶ κρίνουσιν ἄμεινον οἱ πολλοὶ καὶ τὰ τῆς μουσικῆς ἔργα καὶ τὰ τῶν ποιητῶν</foreign>.</note> He used to read his own pieces to successively wider
circles, each time receiving suggestions for amendment.
Many of Pliny’s Letters, like the dialogue <hi rend="italic">De Oratoribus</hi>, reveal
the keenness with which in those days questions of style were
debated. But, as in the circle of Sidonius, this very energy
of criticism was perhaps due to a dim consciousness of waning
force.<note place="foot">Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 14; vii. 15;
i. 6.</note> Pliny, with all his kindly optimism, lets fall a phrase
here and there which betrays an uneasiness about the future
of letters.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 12. Seneca was even
more pessimist, cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 23; 100;
<hi rend="italic">De Brev. V.</hi> xiii. 1.</note> Enthusiasm is failing. Nay, there is a hardly
veiled contempt for that eager mediocrity which Pliny and
Titinius Capito made it a point of honour to encourage. We
feel that we are on the edge of that arid desert of cultivated
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>impotence in which the freshness and vigour of Roman
literature was soon mysteriously to disappear.
</p>

<p>
Great as were the attractions of the capital, its gay social
circles with their multifarious engagements, its games and
spectacles, and literary novelties, yet the most devoted
<q>Ardelio,</q> in the end, felt the strain and the monotony to be
oppressive.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 9; quot dies quam
frigidis rebus absumpsi! cf. the social
life of Symmachus, <hi rend="italic">Roman Society in
the Last Century of the Western Empire</hi>,
p. 128 sq. (1st ed.).</note> Seneca and Pliny, Martial and Juvenal,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> xii.; Juv. iii. xi.
Mart. xii. 18.</note> from
various points of view, lament or ridicule the inanity and the
slavery of city life. Roman etiquette was perhaps the most
imperious and exacting that ever existed. Morning receptions,
punctilious attendance at the assumption of the toga, at
betrothals, or the sealing of wills, or the reading of some tedious
epic, advice or support in the law courts, congratulations to
friends on every official success, these duties, and many others,
left men, who had a large circle of acquaintance, hardly a moment
of repose. Hence the rapture with which Pliny escapes to
the stillness of the Laurentine pine woods, or the pure cold
breezes that blew from the Apennines over his Tuscan seat.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 9; iv. 1.</note>
In these calm solitudes the weary advocate and man of letters
became for a little while his own master, and forgot the din
and crush of the streets, the paltry ambitions, the malevolent
gossip and silly rumours of the great world, in some long-suspended
literary task. There can be no doubt that an intense
enjoyment was becoming more and more felt in country
life. Its unbought, home-grown luxuries, its common sights
and sounds, its antique simplicity, have a strange charm even
for a hardened bohemian like Martial.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 58.</note> But Pliny, besides this
commoner form of enjoyment, has a keen and exquisite feeling for
beauty of scenery. He loves the amphitheatre of hills, crowned
with immemorial forest that looks down on rich pastoral slope,
or vineyard or meadow, bright with the flowers of spring, and
watered by the winding Tiber; he loves the scenery of Como,
where you watch the fishermen at his toils from some retreat
on the terraced banks.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 6, § 7, 8; i. 3; ix. 7
§ 4.</note> Where in ancient literature can you
find a more sharp and clear-cut picture of a romantic scene than
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>in his description of the Clitumnus?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 8; cf. Virg. <hi rend="italic">Georg.</hi> ii. 146;
once visited by Caligula, Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi>
43.</note> The famous stream rises
under a low hill, shaded by ancient cypresses, and broadens
into a basin in whose glassy ice-cold waters you may count the
pebbles. Soon the current grows broader and swifter, and the
barges are swept along under groves of ash and poplar, which,
so vivid is their reflection, seem to be growing in the river-bed.
Hard by, is a temple of the river-god, with many other chapels,
and a seat of ancient augury; the magic charm of antique religious
awe blends with the witchery of nature, and many a villa
is planted on fair spots along the banks. There was plenty of
sport to be had in the Apennines or the Laurentine woods. But
Pliny was plainly not a real sportsman. He once tells his friend
Tacitus, who seems to have rallied him on this failing, that
although he has killed three boars, he much prefers to sit,
tablets in hand beside the nets, meditating in the silent glade.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 6, solitudo ipsumque
illud silentium quod venationi datur
magna cogitationis incitamenta sunt.</note>
The country is charming to Pliny, but its greatest charm lies in
the long tranquil hours which can be given to literary musing.
Part of the well-regulated day of Spurinna, a man who had commanded
armies and governed provinces, and who had reached
his seventy-seventh year, is devoted to lyric composition both
in Greek and Latin.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 1, § 7.</note> Pliny once or twice laments the mass
of literary talent which, from diffidence or love of ease, was
buried in these rural retreats.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 25.</note> There must have been many
a country squire, like that Terentius, who, apparently lost in
bucolic pursuits, surprised his guest by the purity of his taste
and his breadth of culture. We often meet the same buried
talent after nearly four centuries in the pages of Sidonius.<note place="foot">Sidon. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 6; ii. 14; vii.
15.</note>
</p>

<p>
The literature of the Flavian age has preserved for us many
pictures of Roman villas. They occupied every variety of site.
They were planted on rocks where the sea-foam flecked their
walls,<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> ii. 2, 22, spumant
templa salo.</note> or on inland lakes and rivers, embowered in woods, or
on the spurs of the Apennines, between the ancient forest and
the wealthy plain.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 6.</note> Some of these mansions were remote and
secluded. But on the Bay of Naples, on the Laurentine
shore or the banks of Lake Como,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 17, § 27.</note> they clustered thickly.
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>Building in the days of Domitian was as much the rage as
it was in the days of Horace, and, just as then, all natural
obstacles were defied in preparing a site to the builder’s
taste. In the grounds of Pollius Felix in the <hi rend="italic">Silvae</hi>, whole
hills had been levelled, and rocks had been cleared away to
make a space for the house with its gardens and woodlands.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> ii. 2, 53; cf. iii. 1, 124.</note>
Manlius Vopiscus had built two luxurious seats on opposite
banks of the Anio, where the stream glides silently under
overarching boughs.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 3, 20-37.</note> The villas pressed so close to the water
that you could converse, and almost touch hands, across the
interval between them. The love of variety, or the obligation
imposed on senators to invest a third of their fortune in Italian
land,<note place="foot">Imposed by Trajan on candidates
for office, Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 19. This was
a repetition of former enactments, <hi rend="italic">e.g.</hi>
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 48. It was revived again by
M. Aurelius, <anchor id="corr176"/><corr sic="Capitol">Capitol.</corr> xi. Exclusion
from commerce necessitated investments
in land. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 19, sum prope
totus in praediis, aliquid tamen foenero.
In <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 106 the price of land was
rising, <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 19; but cf. iii. 19 (<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>
101); see Friedl. i. p. 197.</note> may account for the number of country seats possessed
even by men who were not of the wealthiest class.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> vii. 10, 5; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89,
§ 20; Mart. v. 13, 7; Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi>
76, 77; Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> ii. 6, 62.</note> Pliny had
villas at Laurentum, at Tifernum Tiberinum, at Beneventum,
and more than two on Lake Como.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 17; v. 6; ix. 7; iv.
1; iv. 13.</note> The orator Regulus had
at least five country seats.<note place="foot">Mart. vii. 31.</note> Silius Italicus had several stately
abodes in the same district of Campania, and, with capricious
facility, transferred his affections to each new acquisition.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is by no means an easy task, and perhaps not a very
profitable one, to trace minutely the arrangement of one of
these great houses. Indeed there seems to have been a good
deal of caprice and little care for symmetry in their architecture.
The builder appears to have given no thought to external
effect. To catch a romantic view from the windows, to escape
the sultry heat of midsummer, or woo the brief sunshine of
December, above all to obtain perfect stillness, were the objects
which seem to have dictated the plans of the Roman
architect.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. 64.</note> The Laurentine villa of Pliny and the Surrentine
of Pollius Felix from their windows or colonnades gave glimpses
of forest or mountain, or sea, or fat herds browsing on the
meadow grass, or a view seaward to the islands off the
Cam<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>panian shore.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 17; Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> ii. 2,
76.</note> One room admits the morning sun, another is
brightened by the glow of evening. Here is a colonnade
where in winter you can pace up and down with shutters
closed on the weather side, or in spring-time enjoy the scent
of violets and the temperate sunshine.<note place="foot">Plin. ii. 17, § 16.</note> In the mansions on
the Anio, there is, according to Statius, an air of everlasting
quietness, never broken even by wandering wind, or ripple
of the stream.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> i. 3, 29.</note> Pliny has a distant room at Laurentum, to
which even the licensed din of the Saturnalia never penetrates.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 17, § 24.</note>
Thus these villas threw out their chambers far and wide,
meandering in all directions, according to the fancy of the
master, or the charms of the neighbouring scenery.
</p>

<p>
The luxury of the Roman villa consisted rather in the
spaciousness and variety of building, to suit the changing
seasons, than in furniture for comfort or splendour. There were,
indeed, in many houses some costly articles, tables of citrus and
ivory, and antique vases, of priceless worth.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. 87.</note> But the chambers
of the most stately houses would probably, to modern taste, seem
scantily furnished. It was on the walls and ceiling and columns
that the Roman of taste lavished his wealth. The houses of
Pliny, indeed, seem to have been little adorned by this sort of
costly display.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 6.</note> But the villa of Pollius Felix, like the baths
of Claudius Etruscus, shone with all the glory of variegated
marbles on plaque and pillar, drawn from the quarries of
Phrygia, Laconia, and Syene, Carystus and Numidia.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> ii. 2, 85; i. 5, 36;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. 65.</note> Pliny
confesses that he is not a connoisseur in art. He speaks
with hesitation of the merit of a Corinthian bronze which he
has acquired.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 6; cf. the taste of Silius
Italicus, iii. 7, 8; Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 50, 88;
Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">Greek World</hi>, etc., p. 139 sq.</note> But he was surrounded in his own class by
artistic enthusiasm, much of it, it is to be feared, pretentious
and ignorant. The dispersion of the artistic wealth of Greek
lands had flooded Italy with the works of the great masters.
Collectors of them, like Silius Italicus, abounded. The
fashion became so general and so imperious, that it penetrated
even into the vulgar circle of people like Trimalchio, who, in
interpreting the subject of the chasing on a cup, could confuse
the Punic and the Trojan wars. In the villas described
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>by Statius, it would seem that the art of Apelles, Pheidias,
Myron, and Polycletus adorned the saloons and colonnades.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Silv.</hi> i. 3, 50; ii. 2, 63 sq.;
Mart. iv. 39.</note>
It may be doubted, however, whether many of these works
could claim such illustrious parentage. There was plenty of
facile technique in those days which might easily deceive the
vulgar collector by more or less successful reproduction.<note place="foot">Friedl. iii. 196; cf. Croiset, <hi rend="italic">Lucien</hi>,
c. ix. p. 265; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> ii. 611.</note> The
confident claim to artistic discrimination was not less common
in the Flavian age than in later days, and it was probably as
fallible. It is rather suspicious that, in the attempts at
artistic appreciation in this period, attention seems to be
concentrated on the supposed antiquity, rarity, or costliness of
material. There is little in the glowing descriptions in the
<hi rend="italic">Silvae</hi> to indicate a genuine appreciation of real art.
</p>

<p>
It is possible that the great Roman country seat, in its vast
extent, although not in the stateliness of its exterior, may have
surpassed the corresponding mansions of our time. It was the
expression in stone of the dominant passion of an enormously
wealthy class, intoxicated with the splendour of imperial power,
and ambitious to create monuments worthy of an imperial
race. Moreover, the Roman’s energy always exulted in
triumphing over natural difficulties. Just as he drove his
roads unswerving over mountain and swamp, so he took a
pride in rearing his piles of masonry on the most obstinate
and defiant sites, or even in the middle of the waves. But, in
the extent of their parks, and the variety of floral display, the
Romans of the most luxurious age seldom reached the modern
English standard. The grounds of the villas which, in thick
succession, lined the Laurentine or Campanian shore, cannot
have been very extensive. Pliny has splendid views from his
windows of forest, mountain, and meadow, but the scene lies
plainly beyond the bounds of his demesne.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 6, 7; cf. ii. 17, § 3.</note> The gardens and
shrubberies are very artificial, arranged in terraces or labyrinths
close to the house, or with hedges of box clipped into shapes of
animals along an open colonnade. The hippodrome at his
Tuscan seat, for riding exercise, is formed by lines of box and
laurel and cypress and plane tree. The fig and mulberry
form a garden at the Laurentine villa.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 17, § 15; v. 6, § 33.</note> The cultivated
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>flowers are few, only roses and violets. But the Romans made
up for variety by lavish profusion. In the Neronian orgies a
fortune was sometimes spent on Egyptian roses for a single
banquet.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xxvii.; Friedl. iii. 77 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
We might almost conjecture how the days passed amid
such scenes, even without any formal diary. But Pliny has
left us two descriptions of a gentleman’s day in the country.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ix. 36; iii. 1.</note>
Pliny himself, as we might expect, awoke early, about six
o’clock, and in one of those sleeping-rooms, so carefully shut
off from the voices of nature or from household noise, with
shutters still closed, he meditated some literary piece. Then,
calling for his amanuensis, he dictated what he had composed.
About ten or eleven, he passed into a shady cloister, opening
on a bed of violets, or a grove of plane trees, where he
continued his literary work. Then followed a drive, during
which, according to his uncle’s precept and example, his
studies were still continued.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 5, § 15.</note> A short siesta, a walk, declamation
in Greek and Latin, after the habit of Cicero, gymnastic
exercise, and the bath, filled the space till dinner time arrived.
During this meal, a book was read aloud, and the evening
hours were enlivened by acting or music and the society of
friends. Occasional hunting and the cares of a rural estate
came in to vary this routine. The round of Spurinna’s day,
which excited Pliny’s admiration by its rigid regularity, is
pretty much the same as his own, except that Spurinna
seems to have talked more and read less.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
To the ordinary English squire Pliny’s studious life in the
country would not seem very attractive. And his pretence
of sport was probably ridiculed even in his own day.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ix. 36, § 6.</note> But
his Letters give glimpses of a rural society which, both in its
pleasures and its cares, has probably been always much the
same from one age to another in Europe. On his way to
Como, Pliny once turned aside for a couple of days to his
Tuscan estate, to join in the dedication of a temple which he
had built for the people of Tifernum Tiberinum. The consecration
was to be followed by a dinner to his good neighbours,
who had elected him patron of their township, who were
very proud of his career, and greeted him warmly whenever
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>he came among them.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 1.</note> There is also the record of the restoration,
in obedience to the warning of a diviner, of an ancient
temple of Ceres on his lands, with colonnades to shelter the
worshippers who frequented the shrine. And the venerable
wooden statue of the goddess, which was much decayed, had
to be replaced by a more artistic image. But the life of a
Roman proprietor, of course, had its prosaic and troublesome
side which Pliny does not conceal. There is an interesting
letter in which he consults a friend on the question of the
purchase of an estate.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 19.</note> It adjoined, or rather cut into his
own lands. It could be managed by the same bailiff, and
the same staff of labourers and artisans would serve for both
estates. On the other hand, Pliny thinks, it is better not
to put too many eggs into one basket. It is more prudent
to have estates widely dispersed, and thus less exposed to a
single stroke of calamity. Moreover this estate, however
tempting, with its fertile, well-watered meadows, its vineyards
and woods, is burdened by an insolvent tenantry, who, through
faulty management, have been allowed to fall into arrear.
Pliny, however, is tempted to buy at a greatly reduced price,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 7. This estate was once
worth HS.5,000,000; it was now offered
for HS.3,000,000, <hi rend="italic">i.e.</hi> £25,000; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
iv. 6; ii. 4, 3. The letter iii. 19
belongs to the year 101 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>; but in
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 19 (106 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>) it appears that
the price of land was rising, owing to
competition, and Pliny advises Nepos
to sell his Italian estates and buy
others in the provinces; cf. vi. 3, 1.</note>
and, in order to meet the payment, although his wealth is
nearly all in land, he can call in some loans at interest, and
the balance can be borrowed from his father-in-law, whose
purse is always at his disposal. Pliny was sometimes worried
by the complaints of the people on his estates, and finds it
very difficult to secure solvent tenants on a five years lease.
He made liberal remissions of rent, but arrears went on
accumulating, until the tenant in despair gave up any attempt
to repay his debt. In this extremity, Pliny resolved to adopt
a different system of letting. He substituted for a fixed rent
a certain proportion of the produce,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ix. 37, medendi una ratio, si
non nummo sed partibus locem; cf.
J. S. Mill, <hi rend="italic">Pol. Econ.</hi> bk. ii. c. 8, 1;
A. Young, <hi rend="italic">Travels in France</hi>, p. 18.</note> in fact the métayer
system, and employed some of his people to see that the
returns were not fraudulently diminished. At another time
he is embarrassed by finding that, owing to a bad vintage,
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>the men who have bought his grapes in advance are going to
be heavy losers. He makes a uniform remission to all of
about twelve per cent. But he gives an additional advantage to
the large buyers, and to those who had been prompt in their
payments.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 2; ix. 37, 3.</note> It is characteristic of the man that he says, quite
naturally, that the landlord should share with his tenant such
risks from the fickleness of nature.
</p>

<p>
So good a man was sure to be far more afflicted by the
troubles of his dependents than by any pecuniary losses of his
own. One year, there were many deaths among his slaves.
Pliny feels this acutely, but he consoles himself by the reflection
that he has been liberal in manumission, and still more liberal in
allowing his slaves to make their wills, the validity of which he
maintains as if they were legal instruments.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. 16; cf. the Lex Coll.
Cultorum Dianae et Antinoi, <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
6086. The slave member is permitted
to dispose of his funeraticium by will.
Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 189.</note> If Pliny shows
a little too much self-complacency in this human sympathy,
there can be no doubt that, like Seneca, he felt that slaves
were humble friends, men of the same flesh and blood as the
master, and that the master has a moral duty towards them,
quite apart from the legal conventions of Rome.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 31; 47; 77; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i.
18, 3; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 21; Juv. xiv. 16;
D. Chr. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> x.; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 18, § 7;
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 358; Denis, <hi rend="italic">des
Idées Morales</hi>, etc., ii. 208 sq.; Wallon,
<hi rend="italic">L’Esclav.</hi> i. c. 11; Marq. i. 189.</note> When his
wife’s grandfather proposed to make numerous manumissions,
Pliny rejoiced greatly at the accession of so many new citizens
to the municipality.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 32. Fabatus seems to have
been a model country squire; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
iv. 1; v. 11; vi. 12; vii. 11; viii. 10.</note> When his favourite reader, Encolpius,
was seized with hemorrhage, Pliny displayed a genuine and most
affectionate concern for the humble partner of his studies.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. 1.</note>
Another member of his household, a freedman named Zosimus,
suffered from the same malady. Zosimus seems to have
been a most excellent, loyal, and accomplished man. He was
very versatile, a comedian, a musician, a tasteful reader of
every kind of literature.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> v. 19; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 27, § 6;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">SG.</hi> iii. 89; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 158.</note> His patron sent him to Egypt to
recruit his health. But, from putting too great a strain upon
his voice, he had a return of his dangerous illness, and once
more needed change of air. Pliny determined to send him to
the Riviera, and begs a friend, Paulinus, to let Zosimus have the
use of his villa and all necessary attention, for which Pliny will
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>bear the cost.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 19.</note> In his social relations with his freedmen Pliny
always shows himself the perfect, kindly gentleman. Juvenal
and Martial poured their scorn on those unequal dinners, where
the guests were graduated, and where poorer wine and coarser
viands were served out to those of humble degree.<note place="foot">Mart. i. 44; iii. 49; Juv. v. 25 sqq.;
cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> vi. 33, § 4.</note> Pliny
was present at one of these entertainments, and he expresses
his contempt for the vulgar host in terms of unwonted energy.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 6.</note>
His own freedmen, as he tells a fellow-guest, are entertained as
equals at his table. If a man fears the expense, he can find a
remedy by restraining his own luxury, and sharing the plain
fare which he imposes on his company. Pliny’s relations
with his slaves and freedmen were very like those which the
kindly English squire cultivates towards his household and
dependents. The affectionate regret for a good master or
mistress, recorded on many an inscription of that age,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2862, 2874, 6389.</note> shows
that Pliny’s household was by no means a rare exception.
</p>

<p>
Yet the Letters of Pliny, with all their charity and
tranquil optimism, reveal now and then a darker side of
household slavery. A man of praetorian rank named Largius
Macedo, who forgot, or perhaps too vividly remembered, his
own servile origin, was known as a cruel and haughty master.
While he was enjoying the bath in his Formian villa, he was
suddenly surrounded by a throng of angry slaves who, with
every expression of hatred and loathing, inflicted on him such
injuries that he was left for dead on the glowing pavement.
He seemed, or pretended for a while, to be dead. A few who
remained faithful took up the apparently lifeless corpse, amid
the shrieks of his concubines, and bore him into the Frigidarium.
The coolness and the clamour recalled him from his
swoon. The would-be murderers meanwhile had fled, but many
of them were caught in the end, and the outrage was sternly
avenged.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 14.</note> In another letter, Pliny tells the tale of the
mysterious disappearance of one Metilius Crispus, a citizen
of Como, for whom Pliny had obtained equestrian rank, and
made him a gift of the required HS.400,000. Metilius set
out on a journey and was never heard of again.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 25; cf. the similar fate
of Lampridius, at the close of the Western
Empire in Gaul, Sid. Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii.
11. § 10.</note> It is
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>significant that of the slaves who attended him no one ever
reappeared. Amid such perils, says Pliny, do we masters live,
and no kindness can relieve us from alarm. Seneca remarks
that the master’s life is continually at the mercy of his slaves.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 4, § 8; 107, 5.</note>
And the cruel stringency of legislation shows how real was the
peril.
</p>

<p>
Pliny was only an infant in the evil days when suicide
was the one refuge from tyranny, when the lancet so often
opened the way to <q>eternal freedom.</q> Yet, even in his later
years, men not unfrequently escaped from intolerable calamity
or incurable disease by a voluntary death.<note place="foot">See a great mass of instances and
authorities collected, with his unique
learning, by Mayor, <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> iii. pp. 114,
115; cf. Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 212.</note> The morality
of suicide was long a debated question. There were strict
moralists who maintained that it was never lawful to quit
one’s post before the final signal to retreat. Men like Seneca
regarded it as a question to be determined by circumstances
and motives.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 11; 58, § 36; 70, §
8; 117, § 22; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> ii. 10; vi. 7;
<hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 15; Epict. i. 24; cf. ii. 15;
iii. 24; M. Aurel. x. 8; x. 32; cf.
Mommsen, <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 100.</note> He would not palliate wild, impetuous self-murder,
without a justifying cause. On the other hand, there
might be, especially under a monster like Nero, cases in which
it were mere folly not to choose an easy emancipation rather
than a certain death of torture and ignominy. Eternal law,
which has assigned a single entrance to this life, has mercifully
allowed us many exits. Any death is preferable to servitude.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 70, § 21, dum hoc constat
praeferendam esse spurcissimam mortem
servituti mundissimae.</note>
So, in the case of disease and old age, it is merely a question
whether the remainder of life is worth living. If the mental
powers are falling into irreparable decay, if the malady is
tormenting and incurable, Seneca would permit the rational
soul to quit abruptly its crumbling tenement, not to escape
pain or weakness, but to shake off the slavery of a worthless
life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 58, § 36, non adferam mihi
manus propter dolorem: hunc tamen si
sciero perpetuo mihi esse patiendum,
exibo; non propter ipsum, sed quia
impedimento mihi futurus est ad omne
propter quod vivitur ... prosiliam ex
aedificio putri ac ruenti.</note>
</p>

<p>
Pliny was not a philosopher, and had no elaborate theory of
suicide or of anything else. But his opinion on the question
may be gathered from his remarks on the case of Titius Aristo,
the learned jurist. To rush on death, he says, is a vulgar,
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>commonplace act. But to balance the various motives, and make
a deliberate and rational choice may, in certain circumstances,
be the proof of a lofty mind.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 22, 10; Aristo was a
fine type of the puritan pagan, an
<q>imago priscae frugalitatis.</q></note> The cases of suicide described
in the Letters are nearly always cases of incurable or prolonged
disease. The best known is that of the luxurious Silius
Italicus, who starved himself to death in his seventy-fifth year.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 7, 1. For similar instances,
<hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 70, § 6; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 3;
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 53; Petron. 111; Epict. ii.
15.</note>
He was afflicted with an incurable tumour, almost the only
trouble in his long and happy life. Corellius Rufus, who had
watched over Pliny’s career with almost parental care,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ix. 13, 6; cf. iv. 17, 4;
vii.</note> chose
to end his life in a similar manner. Pliny was immensely
saddened by the close of a life which seemed to enjoy so many
blessings, high character, great reputation and influence, family
love and friendship. Yet he does not question the last resolve
of Corellius. In his thirty-third year he had been seized with
hereditary gout. During the period of vigorous manhood, he
had warded off its onsets by an extreme abstinence. But as
old age crept on, its tortures, wracking every limb, became
unendurable, and Corellius determined to put an end to the
hopeless struggle. His obstinacy was proof against all the
entreaties of his wife and friends, and Pliny, who was called
in as a last resource, came only to hear the physician repelled
for the last time with a single energetic word.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 12, 10. It is characteristic
of the time that his last word was
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">κέκρικα</foreign>.</note> Sailing once
on Lake Como, Pliny heard from an old friend the tragic tale
of a double suicide from a verandah overhanging the lake.
The husband had long suffered from a loathsome and hopeless
malady. His wife insisted on knowing the truth, and, when
it was revealed to her, she nerved him to end the cruel ordeal,
and promised to bear him company. Bound together, the pair
took the fatal leap.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
In spite of his charity and optimism,<note place="foot">Pliny boasts of idealising his
friends; vii. 28, agnosco crimen....
Ut enim non sint tales quales a me
praedicantur, ego tamen beatus quod
mihi videntur.</note> it would not be altogether
true to say that Pliny was blind to the faults and vices
of his time. He speaks, with almost Tacitean scorn, of the
rewards which awaited a calculating childlessness, and of the
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>eager servility of the will-hunter.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 18; iv. 21; viii. 10,
11, neque enim ardentius tu pronepotes
quam ego liberos cupio; cf. iv. 15, 3,
fecunditate uxoris frui voluit eo saeculo
quo plerisque etiam singulos filios orbitatis
praemia graves faciunt.</note> In recommending a tutor for
the son of Corellia Hispulla, he regards the teacher’s stainless
character as of paramount importance in an age of dangerous
licence, when youth was beset with manifold seductions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 3, in hac licentia temporum.</note> He
blushes for the degradation of senatorial character displayed in
the scurrilous or obscene entries which were sometimes found on
the voting tablets of the august body.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 25, proximis comitiis in
quibusdam tabellis multa jocularia
atque etiam foeda dictu ... inventa
sunt.</note> The decline of modesty
and courteous deference in the young towards their elders
greatly afflicted so courteous a gentleman. There seemed to be
no respect left for age or authority. With their fancied omniscience
and intuitive wisdom, young men disdain to learn from
any one or to imitate any example; they are their own models.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. 23, 3, ipsi sibi exempla sunt.</note>
Among the many spotless and charming women of Pliny’s
circle, there is one curious exception, one, we may venture to
surmise, who had been formed in the Neronian age. Ummidia
Quadratilla was a lady of the highest rank, who died at the age
of eighty in the middle of the reign of Trajan.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 24,
    she was born about
<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 27, in the reign of Tiberius. Ummidia
had the virtue of liberality; she
built an amphitheatre and temple for
Casinum, <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 781.</note> She preserved
to the end an extraordinary health and vigour, and evidently
enjoyed the external side of life with all the zest of the old
days of licence in her youth. Her grandson, who lived under
her roof, was one of Pliny’s dearest friends, a spotless and
almost puritanical character. Ummidia, even in her old age,
kept a troop of pantomimic artistes, and continued to enjoy
their doubtful exhibitions. But her grandson would never
witness them, and, it must be said, Ummidia respected and
even encouraged a virtue superior to her own.
</p>

<p>
It has been remarked that, in nearly all these cases, where
Pliny has any fault to find with his generation, the evil seems
to be only a foil for the virtue of some of his friends. Even in
his own day, there were those who criticised him for his extravagant
praise of the people he loved. He takes the censure
as a compliment, preferring the kind-heartedness which is
occasionally deceived, to the cold critical habit which has
lost all illusions.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 28, 2.</note> Pliny belonged to a caste who were linked
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>to one another by the strongest ties of loyalty and tradition.<note place="foot">Cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 14, on his relations with
Cornutus Tertullus: quae societas amicitiarum
artissima nos familiaritate
conjunxit.</note>
The members of it were bound to support one another by
counsel, encouragement, and influence, they were expected
to help a comrade’s advancement in the career of honours, to
applaud and stimulate his literary ambition, to be prodigal of
sympathy or congratulation or pecuniary help in all the vicissitudes
of public or private life.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 6; vi. 32; in which
he offers a dowry to Quintilian’s
daughter in the most delicate way;
cf. Juv. iii. 215; xv. 150; Sen. <hi rend="italic">De
Benef.</hi> ii. 21, 5; iv. 11, 3; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi>
iv. 62; yet cf. the judgment of D.
Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. § 82; Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées
Morales</hi>, ii. 175 sqq.</note> The older men, who had borne
the weight of great affairs, recognised the duty of forming the
character of their juniors by precept and criticism. In this
fashion the old soldier Spurinna, on his morning drive, would
pour forth to some young companion the wealth of his long experience.
In this spirit Verginius Rufus and Corellius stood by
Pliny throughout his official career, to guide and support him.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 23, 2; vi. 11, 3;
i. 12, 12; ii. 1, 8 (of Verginius Rufus),
sic candidatum me suffragio ornavit,
etc., iii. 1, 6 (of Spurinna), quibus praeceptis
imbuare!</note>
Pliny, in his turn, was always lavish of this kind of help, and
deemed it a matter of pride and duty to afford it. Sometimes
he solicits office for a friend’s son, or commends a man to the
emperor for the <hi rend="italic">Jus trium liberorum</hi>.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 87, 94.</note> Sometimes he applauds
the early efforts of a young pleader at the bar, or gives him
counsel as to the causes which he should undertake, or the
discipline necessary for oratorical success.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 29.</note> He was often consulted
about the choice of a tutor for boys, and he responded
with all the earnestness of a man who believed in the infinite
importance of sound influence in the early years of life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 3.</note> To
his older friends he would address disquisitions on style, consolations
in bereavement, congratulations on official preferment,
descriptions of some fair scene or picturesque incident in rural
life. He often wrote, like Symmachus, merely to maintain
the connection of friendly sympathy by a chat on paper. His
vanity is only too evident in some of these letters. But it is,
after all, an innocent vanity and the consuming anxiety to
cherish the warmth and solidarity of friendship, and a high
tone in the great class to which he belonged, might well cover
even graver faults. If there was too much self-indulgence in
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>that class, if they often abandoned themselves to the seductions
of ease and literary trifling in luxurious retreats, it is also to
be remembered that a man of rank paid heavily for his place
in Roman society, both in money and in the observance of a
very exacting social code. And no one recognised the obligation
with more cheerful alacrity than Pliny.
</p>

<p>
Pliny felt a genuine anxiety that young men of birth should
aim at personal distinction. Any gleam of generous ambition,
any sign of strenuous energy, which might save a young
aristocrat from the temptations of ease and wealth, were hailed
by him with unaffected delight. He was evidently very susceptible
to the charm of manner which youths of this class
often possess. When to that was added strength of character,
his satisfaction was complete. Hence his delight when Fuscus
Salinator and Ummidius Quadratus, of the very cream of
the Roman nobility, entered on the conflicts of the Centumviral
Court.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 11.</note> And indeed these young men appear to have
had many graces and virtues. Salinator, in particular, with
exquisite literary culture, had a mingled charm of boyish
simplicity, gravity, and sweetness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 26.</note> Asinius Bassus, the son
of Asinius Rufus, was another of this promising band of youth,
blameless, learned, and diligent, whom Pliny commends for the
quaestorship to Fundanus, then apparently designated as consul.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 15. Fundanus’s consulship
is mentioned in two inscriptions, <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
1588, 2471. There is a difficulty about
the dates which is discussed in Momms.
<hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 17, n. 3. Fundanus does not
appear in the <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>.</note>
There is no more genuine feeling in the Letters than the grief
of Pliny for the early death of Junius Avitus, another youth
of high promise. Pliny had formed his character, and supported
him in his candidature for office. He had helped him
with advice in his studies, or in his administrative duties.
Avitus repaid all this paternal care by a docility and deference
which were becoming rare among the young men of the day.
Winning the affection and confidence of his elders in the
service, Avitus was surely destined to develop into one of those
just and strenuous imperial officers, like Corbulo or Verginius
Rufus, many of whom have left only a name on a brief inscription,
but who were the glory and strength of the Empire
in the times of its deepest degradation. But all such hopes for
Avitus were extinguished in a day.
</p>

<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>

<p>
The upright and virtuous men of Pliny’s circle, Corellius
Rufus, Titinius Capito the historian, Pegasus the learned
jurist, Trebonius Rufus the magistrate who suppressed the
games at Vienne, Junius Mauricus, who would have denied
them to the capital, and many others of the like stamp, have
often been used to refute the pessimism of Juvenal. We have
in a former chapter seen reason to believe that the satirist’s
view of female character needs to be similarly rectified. Even
in the worst reigns the pages of Tacitus reveal to us strong
and pure women, both in the palace and in great senatorial
houses. In the wide philosophic class there was probably
many an Arria and Plotina. In the <hi rend="italic">Agricola</hi>, and in Seneca’s
letters to Marcia and Helvia, we can see that, even at the
darkest hour, there were homes with an atmosphere of old
Roman self-restraint and sobriety, where good women wielded
a powerful influence over their husbands and their sons,
and where the examples of the old Republic were used,
as Biblical characters with us, to fortify virtue.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xiii. xiv.; <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi>
xvi.</note> Seneca, in
his views about women, as in many other things, is essentially
modern. He admires indeed the antique ideal of self-contained
strength and homely virtue. But he also believes
in the equal capacity of women for culture, even in the field of
philosophy, and he half regrets that an old-fashioned prejudice
had debarred Helvia from receiving a philosophic discipline.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xvi. par illis, mihi crede,
vigor, etc. <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> xvii. 4, cf. Plut.
<hi rend="italic">Conj. Praec.</hi> xlviii.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">φαρμάκων ἐπῳδὰς οὐ προσδέξεται (ἡ γυνὴ) τοῖς Πλάτωνος ἐπᾳδομένη λόγοις, κτλ.</foreign>; cf. Juv. vi. 450;
Mart. vii. 69.</note>
Tacitus and Pliny, who had no great faith in philosophy as a
study for men, would hardly have recommended it for women.
But they lived among women who were cultivated in the
best sense. Pliny’s third wife, Calpurnia, was able to give
him the fullest sympathy in his literary efforts.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 19, § 4.</note> But her
fame, of which she probably little dreamt, is founded on her
purity and sweetness of character. Her ancestors, like Pliny’s,
belonged to the aristocracy of Como. Her aunt, Calpurnia
Hispulla, who was a dear friend of Pliny’s mother, had watched
over her during the years of girlhood with a sedulous care
which made her an ideal wife. What Calpurnia was like as a
girl, we may probably picture to ourselves from the prose elegy
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>of Pliny on the death of the young daughter of Minutius
Fundanus.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> v. 16.</note> It is the picture of a beautiful character, and a
fair young life cut off too soon. The girl had not yet reached
her fourteenth year. She was already betrothed when she
was seized with a fatal sickness. Her sweet girlish modesty,
which was combined with a matronly gravity, charmed all her
father’s friends. She had love for all the household, her tutors
and slaves, nurses and maids. A vigorous mind triumphed
over bodily weakness, and she passed through her last illness
with a sweet patience, encouraging her father and sister to
bear up, and showing no shrinking from death.
</p>

<p>
Although we know of a good many happy wedded lives in
that age,<note place="foot">Seneca and Paulina, Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi>
xv. 64; Plutarch, <hi rend="italic">Ad Uxorem</hi>, iv. v.</note> there is no picture so full of pure devotion and tenderness
as that which we have in Pliny’s letters to Calpurnia. They
are love-letters in the best sense and the most perfect style.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 4, 5, 7.</note>
Pliny’s youth was long past when he won the hand of Calpurnia,
yet their love for one another is that of boy and girl. When
she has to go into Campania for her health, he is racked with
all sorts of anxiety about her, and entreats her to write once,
or even twice, a day. Pliny reads her letters over and over
again, as if they had just come. He has her image before him
by night, and at the wonted hour by day his feet carry him to
her vacant room. His only respite from these pains of a lover
is while he is engaged in court. Pliny had frequent care about
Calpurnia’s health. They did not belong to the hideous class
who preferred <q>the rewards of childlessness,</q> but their hopes
of offspring were dashed again and again. These griefs were
imparted to Calpurnia’s aunt, and to her grandfather, Calpurnius
Fabatus, a generous old squire of Como, who was as anxious as
Pliny to have descendants of his race. At the time of the old
man’s death, Calpurnia was with her husband in Bithynia, and
she wished to hasten home at once to console her aunt. Pliny,
not having time to secure the emperor’s sanction, gave her
the official order for the use of the public post on her journey
back to Italy. In answer to his letter of explanation and
excuse, Trajan sent his approval in his usual kind and
courteous style. This is the last glimpse we have of Pliny
and Calpurnia.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 121, 122.</note>
</p>

<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>

<p>
Pliny’s character, as displayed in his Letters, is the embodiment
of the finest moral tone of the great age which had
opened when he died, in kindlier or juster treatment of the
slave, in high respect for women, in conscientious care for the
education of the young, in beneficent provision for the helpless
and distressed. But it would be a mistaken view to regard
these ideas as an altogether new departure. It is dangerous
to assert that anything is altogether new in Roman social
history. The truth is that the moral sentiment in which these
movements took their rise had been for generations in the air.
It was diffused by the Stoic preaching of the brotherhood and
equality of men as fellow-citizens of one great commonwealth.
The duty of redeeming the captive and succouring the poor
had been preached by Cicero a century and a half before Pliny’s
Letters appeared.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Off.</hi> ii. 18 (63), atque haec
benignitas etiam reipublicae est utilis,
redimi e servitute captos, locupletari
tenuiores.</note> Horace had, a few years later, asked the
searching question, <q>Why should the worthy be in want while
you have wealth?</q><note place="foot">Hor. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> ii. 2, 103—

<lg>
<l>Cur eget indignus quisquam, te divite?</l>
</lg></note> Seneca preaches, with the unction of
an evangelist, all the doctrines on which the humane legislation
of the Antonine age was founded, all the principles
of humanity and charity of every age. He asserts the
natural equality of bond and free, and the claim of the
slave to kindness and consideration.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47, § 1, 31; <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> iii.
21; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 18, 3; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 24.</note> He brands in many
a passage the cruelty and contempt of the slaveholder. He
preaches tolerance of the froward, forgiveness of insult and
injury.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 52.</note> He enforces the duty of universal kindness and helpfulness
by the example of God, who is bounteous and merciful
even to the evildoer.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Benef.</hi> iv. 5; iv. 26; iv. 28,
Di multa ingratis tribuunt.</note> Juvenal was little of a philosopher, but
he had unconsciously drunk deep of the gospel of philosophy.
Behind all his bitter pessimism there is a pure and lofty moral
tone which sometimes almost approaches the ideal of charity
in S. Paul. The slave whom we torture or insult for some
slight negligence is of the same elements as we are.<note place="foot">Juv. xiv. 16; vi. 219, 476.</note> The
purity of childhood is not to be defiled by the ribaldry of the
banquet and the example of a mother’s intrigues or a father’s
brutal excesses.<note place="foot">Id. xiv. 31.</note> Revenge is the pleasure of a puny soul.<note place="foot">Id. xiii. 190.</note>
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>The guilty may be left to the scourge of the unseen inquisitor.
Juvenal regards the power of sympathy for any human grief
or pain as the priceless gift of Nature, <q>who has given us tears.</q><note place="foot">Juv. xv. 133.</note>
It is by her command that we mourn the calamity of a friend
or the death of the babe <q>too small for the funeral pyre.</q> The
scenes of suffering and pity which the satirist has sketched in
some tender lines were assuredly not imaginary pictures. We are
apt to forget, in our modern self-complacency, that, at least among
civilised races, human nature in its broad features remains
pretty much the same from age to age. On an obscure epitaph
of this period you may read the words—<hi rend="italic">Bene fac, hoc tecum
feres.</hi><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6042.</note> Any one who knows the inscriptions may be inclined
to doubt whether private benefactions under the Antonines
were less frequent and generous than in our own day.
</p>

<p>
The duties of wealth, both in Greece and Rome, were at
all times rigorously enforced by public opinion. The rich had
to pay heavily for their honours and social consideration in
the days of Cicero, and in the days of Symmachus, as they
had in the days of Pericles.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Off.</hi> i. 14; Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii.
78; ix. 126; Olympiod. § 44 (Müller,
<hi rend="italic">Fr. H. Gr.</hi> iv. p. 68); cf. Boeckh,
<hi rend="italic">Public Ec. of Athens</hi> (Trans. Lewis),
pp. 458, 520, 578.</note> They had to contribute to the
amusement of the people, and to support a crowd of clients
and freedmen. In the remotest municipality, the same
ambitions and the same social demands, as we shall show
in the next chapter, put an enormous strain on the resources
of the upper class. Men must have often ruined themselves
by this profuse liberality. In the reign of Augustus a great
patron had several times given a favourite freedman sums of
£3000 or £4000. The patron’s descendant in the reign of
Nero had to become a pensioner of the emperor. Juvenal and
Martial reveal the clamorous demands by which the great
patron was assailed.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 178 n. 10; cf. Juv.
ii. 117; Mart. vii. 64, dominae munere
factus eques; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 34.</note> The motives for this generosity of the
wealthy class were at all times mixed and various. But in
our period, the growth of a pure humane charity is unmistakable,
of a feeling of duty to the helpless, whether
young or old. The State had from the time of the Gracchi
taken upon itself the immense burden of providing food for a
quarter of a million of the proletariat of Rome. But in the
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>days of Pliny it recognised fresh obligations. The importance
of education and the growth of poverty appealed powerfully
to a ruling class, which, under the influence of philosophy, was
coming to believe more and more in the duty of benevolence
and of devotion to things of the mind. All the emperors
from Vespasian to M. Aurelius made liberal provision for the
higher studies.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> 18; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 16,
§ 8; Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi> 11, § 3.</note> But this endowment of culture, which in
the end did harm as well as good, is not so interesting to us
as the charitable foundations for the children of the poor.
It was apparently the emperor Nerva, the rigid economist
who sold the imperial furniture and jewels to replenish the
treasury,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 68. 2; Victor, <hi rend="italic">Epit.</hi> 12.</note> who first made provision for the children of needy
parents throughout Italy. But epigraphy tells us more than
literary history of the charity of the emperors. The tablet of
Veleia is a priceless record of the charitable measures adopted
by Trajan. The motive of the great emperor was probably,
as his panegyrist suggests, political as much as benevolent.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6664; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 28, hi
subsidium bellorum, ornamentum pacis
publicis sumptibus aluntur. Duruy,
iv. 784; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 211;
Kratz, <hi rend="italic">De Benef., a Traj. collatis</hi>, p. 11.</note>
He may have wished to encourage the rearing of children who
should serve in the armies of the State, as well as to relieve
distress. The provision was even more evidently intended to
stimulate agriculture. The landed proprietors of the place, to
the number of forty-six, received on mortgage a loan from the
State of about £10,000 in our money, at an interest of five per
cent, which was less than half the usual rate of that time.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 62. The letter reveals
an unwillingness among the people of
Bithynia to become debtors to the
public treasury.</note>
The interest was appropriated to the maintenance of 300
poor children, at the rate of about £1:11s. a year for
each male child, and £1 for each girl. The illegitimate
children, who, it may be noted, were only two or three out of
so many, received a smaller allowance. The boys were supported
till their eighteenth year, the girls till fourteen. It
was a bold and sagacious attempt to encourage Italian agriculture,
to check the ominous depopulation of Italy,<note place="foot">Cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 27, minore in dies
plebe ingenua; iii. 25; cf. Meriv. viii.
353.</note> and to
answer the cry of the poor. Hadrian continued and even
added to the benefaction of Trajan.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 7.</note> Antoninus Pius, in
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>honour of his wife Faustina, established a foundation for
young girls who were to be called by her not altogether unspotted
name.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi> 8.</note> A similar charity was founded in honour of
her daughter by M. Aurelius.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">M. Aurel.</hi> 26; cf. Capitol.
<hi rend="italic">Pertin.</hi> 9. He found the interest on
Trajan’s foundation nine years in arrear.
Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Alex. Sev.</hi> 57, 7; his charity
children were called Mammaeani; Kratz,
p. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
But, while the emperors were responding to the call of
charity by using the resources of the State, it is clear, from
the Letters of Pliny and from the inscriptions, that private
benevolence was even more active. Pliny has a conception
of the uses and responsibilities of wealth which, in spite of
the teaching of Galilee, is not yet very common. Although
he was not a very wealthy man, he acted up to his principles
on a scale and proportion which only a few of our millionaires
have yet reached. The lavish generosity of Pliny is a
commonplace of social history. We have not the slightest
wish to detract from the merited fame of that kindliest of
Roman gentlemen. But a survey of the inscriptions may
incline the inquirer to believe that, according to their means,
there were many men and women in obscure municipalities
all over the world, who were as generous and public-spirited
as Pliny.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6694 to a man who left
Tibur his sole heir; 3733 ob munificentiam;
3765, 3766, 3882, 7190,
6993, 7001, 781; cf. Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit.
Soph.</hi> ii. 1 sqq.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἄριστα δὲ ἀνθρώπων πλούτῳ ἐχρήσατο</foreign>. Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxix. 4
(8); Friedländer, <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi>
46 sq.</note> With Pliny, as with those more obscure benefactors,
the impelling motive was love for the parent city or
the village which was the home of their race, and where the
years of youth had been passed. Pliny, the distinguished
advocate, the famous man of letters, the darling of Roman
society, still remained the loyal son of Como, from which his
love never strays.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 3, § 1, Comum meae
deliciae; v. 11, 2; iv. 13, respublica
nostra pro filia vel parente.</note> He followed and improved upon the
example of his father in munificence to his native place.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> the inscr. in Momms. <hi rend="italic">Plin.</hi> p. 31.</note>
He had little liking for games and gladiatorial shows, which
were the most popular objects of liberality in those days. But
he gave a sum of nearly £9000 for the foundation of a town
library, with an annual endowment of more than £800 to
maintain it.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 8; v. 7; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1172.</note> Finding that promising youths of Como had
to resort to Milan for their higher education, he offered to
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>contribute one-third of the expense of a high school at Como,
if the parents would raise the remainder. The letter which
records the offer shows Pliny at his best, wise and thoughtful
as well as generous.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 13.</note> He wishes to keep boys under the
protection of home influence, to make them lovers of their
mother city; and he limits his benefaction in order to
stimulate the interest of the parents in the cause of education,
and in the appointment of the teachers. Another sum of
between £4000 and £5000 he gave to Como for the support
of boys and girls of the poorer class.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 18; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1172.</note> He also left more than
£4000 for public baths, and a sum of nearly £16,000 to
his freedmen, and for communal feasts. On two of his estates
he built or repaired temples at his own expense.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 1; cf. ix. 12.</note> His private
benefactions were on a similar scale. It is not necessary to
adopt the cynical conclusion that Pliny has told us all his
liberality. The kindly delicacy with which Pliny claims the
right of a second father to make up the dowry of the daughter
of his friend Quintilian, might surely save him from such an
imputation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 32.</note> In the same spirit he offers to Romatius Firmus
the £2500 which was needed to raise his fortune to the level
of equestrian rank.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 19.</note> When the philosophers were banished by
Domitian, Pliny, who was then praetor, at the most imminent
risk visited his friend Artemidorus, and lent him, free of
interest, a considerable sum of money.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 11.</note> The daughter of one of
his friends was left with an embarrassed estate; Pliny took up
all the debts and left Calvina with an inheritance free from
all burdens.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 4.</note> He gave his old nurse a little estate which cost
him about £800.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 3.</note> But the amount of this good man’s gifts,
which might shame a modern testator with ten times his
fortune, is not so striking as the kindness which prompted
them, and the modest delicacy with which they were made.
</p>

<p>
Yet Pliny, as we have said, is only a shining example of a
numerous class of more obscure benefactors. For a thousand
who know his Letters, there are few who have read the stone
records of similar generosity. Yet these memorials abound for
those who care to read them. And any one who will spend a
few days, or even a few well-directed hours, in examining the
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>inscriptions of the early Empire, will find many a common, self-complacent
prejudice melting away. He will discover a profusion
of generosity to add to the beauty, dignity, or convenience
of the parent city, to lighten the dulness of ordinary life, to bring
all ranks together in common scenes of enjoyment, to relieve want
and suffering among the indigent. The motives of this extraordinary
liberality were indeed often mixed, and it was, from
our point of view, often misdirected. The gifts were sometimes
made merely to win popularity, or to repay civic honours
which had been conferred by the populace. They were too
often devoted to gladiatorial shows and other exhibitions which
only debased the spectators. Yet the greatest part of them
were expended on objects of public utility—baths, theatres,
markets, or new roads and aqueducts, or on those public
banquets which knitted all ranks together. There was in
those days an immense <q>civic ardour,</q> an almost passionate
rivalry, to make the mother city a more pleasant and a more
splendid home. The endless foundations for civic feasts to
all orders, in which even children and slaves were not forgotten,
with a distribution of money at the close, softened the
sharp distinctions of rank, and gave an appreciable relief to
poverty. Other foundations were more definitely inspired by
charity and pity. In remote country towns, there were pious
founders who, like Pliny and Trajan, and the Antonines, provided
for the nurture of the children of the poor. Bequests
were left to cheapen the main necessaries of life.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einleit.</hi> p. 48.</note> Nor were
the aged and the sick forgotten. In Lorium, near the old
home of the Antonines, a humble spice dealer provided in his
will for a free distribution of medicines to the poor people of
the town.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 114.</note> The countless gifts and legacies to the colleges,
which were the refuge of the poor in that age, in every region
of the Roman world, are an irresistible proof of an overflowing
charity. Pliny’s love of the quiet town where his infancy
was passed, and the record of a like patriotism or benevolence
in so many others, draw us on to the study of that free and
generous municipal life which was the great glory of the
Antonine age.
</p>
</div><div type="chapter" n="2" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. Municipal life"/><index index="pdf" level1="II. Municipal life"/>
<head>CHAPTER II</head>

<head type="sub">MUNICIPAL LIFE</head>

<p>
Nearly all the intimate friends of Pliny were, like himself, bred
in the country, and, as we have seen, he has left us a priceless
picture of that rural aristocracy in the calm refinement of
their country seats. But of the ordinary life of the provincial
town we learn very little from Pliny. Indeed, the silence
of Roman literature generally as to social life outside the
capital is very remarkable.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Promenades Archæologiques</hi>,
p. 330, ce qui nous échappe c’est
la vie de province.</note> In the long line of great Latin
authors from Ennius to Juvenal, there is hardly one whose
native place was Rome. The men who are the glory of
Roman letters in epic and lyric poetry, in oratory and
history, in comedy and satire, were born in quiet country towns
in Italy or the remoter provinces. But the reminiscences of
the scenes of their infancy will generally be found to be faint
and rare. Horace, indeed, displays a tender piety for that
borderland of Apulia, where, in the glades of Mount Vultur as
a child, he drank inspiration from the witchery of haunted
groves.<note place="foot">Hor. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> iii. 4, 9.</note> And Martial, the hardened man about town, never
forgot the oak groves and iron foundries of Bilbilis.<note place="foot">Mart. iv. 55, 11; xii. 18, 9; i. 50.</note> But
for the municipal system and life, the relations of its various
social grades, the humdrum routine of the shops and forums,
the rustic rites and deities,<note place="foot">It must, however, be said that
Virgil has preserved much of local
religious sentiment. Cf. Sellar, <hi rend="italic">Virgil</hi>,
p. 365 sq.</note> the lingering echoes of that dim
common life with its vices and honest tenderness, its petty
ambitions or hopeless griefs, we must generally go to the
records in stone, and the remains of buried cities which the
spade has given back to the light.
</p>

<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>

<p>
This silence of the literary class is not due to any want of
love in the Roman for the calm and freshness and haunting
charm of country scenes, still less to callousness towards old
associations. Certainly Virgil cannot be charged with any
such lack of sensibility. In the Eclogues and the Georgics,
the memory of the old farm at Andes breaks through the
more conventional sentiment of Alexandrian tradition. In
the scenery of these poems, there are <q>mossy fountains and
grass softer than sleep,</q> the hues of violet, poppy, and hyacinth,
the shade of ancient ilex, and the yellow wealth of cornfield.
We hear the murmur of bees, <q>the moan of doves in immemorial
elms,</q> the rush of the river, the whispering of the
wind. The pastoral charm of the midsummer prime is
there, from the freshness of fields under the morning
star, through the hours alive with the song of the cicala
and the lowing of the herds around the pool, through the
still, hot, vacant noontide, till the moonbeams are glinting
on the dewy grasses of the glades.<note place="foot">Virg. <hi rend="italic">Ecl.</hi> ii. 48; <hi rend="italic">Georg.</hi> ii. 466
sqq.; iii. 324-338, et saltus reficit
jam roscida luna; cf. Sellar, <hi rend="italic">Virgil</hi>, pp.
166-167.</note> Nor can any lover
of Virgil ever forget the fire of old sentiment in the
muster of Italian chivalry in the seventh book of the
Aeneid.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> vii. 630 sqq.; Sellar, p. 80.</note> Tibur and Praeneste, Anagnia, Nomentum, and
Amiternum, and many another old Sabine town, which send
forth their young warriors to the fray, are each stamped
on the imagination by some grace of natural beauty, or some
glory of ancient legend. In the Flavian period, as we have
seen, the great nobles had their villas on every pleasant
site, wherever sea or hill or woodland offered a fair prospect
and genial air. To these scenes they hastened, like emancipated
schoolboys, when the dog-days set in. They had a genuine
love of the unspoilt countryside, with its simple natural
pleasures, its husbandry of the olden time, its joyous plenty,
above all its careless freedom and repose.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 3; i. 6; i. 9; vii. 30;
ix. 36. Mart. iii. 58; i. 56; iv. 66;
iv. 90; vi. 43.</note> The great charm
of a rural retreat was its distance from the <q>noise and smoke
and wealth</q> of Rome. The escape from the penalties of fame,
from the boredom of interminable dinners, the intrusive importunity
of curious busybodies, the malice of jealous rivals,
gives a fresh zest to the long tranquil days under the ilex
<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>shade among the Sabine hills.<note place="foot">Hor. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> i. 17.</note> Horace probably felt more
keenly than Juvenal the charm of hill and stream and the
scenes of rustic toils and gaiety. Yet the exquisite good
sense of Horace would have recoiled from the declamatory
extravagance with which Juvenal justifies his friend’s
retirement from the capital, by a realistic picture of all
its sordid troubles and vices and absurdities.<note place="foot">Juv. iii.</note> <q>To love
Rome at Tibur and Tibur at Rome</q> was the expression
of the educated Roman’s feelings in a form which he would
have recognised to be as just as it was happy. In spite of
the charm of the country, to any real man of letters
or affairs, the fascination of Rome was irresistible. Pliny,
and no doubt hundreds of his class, from Augustus to
Theodosius, grumbled at the wasteful fashion in which their
lives were frittered away by monotonous social duties, as
imperious as they were generally vain.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Rom. Society in the Last Century
of the Western Empire</hi>, p. 128 sq.
(1st ed.); Sym. i. 101; ii. 26; v. 78.
Cf. Auson. <hi rend="italic">Idyl.</hi> x. 20, 155, 189.</note> Yet to Pliny, as to
Symmachus, the prospect of never again seeing the city, so
seductive and so wearying, would have been absolutely intolerable.
Martial, when he retired to Bilbilis, seems to pity his
friend Juvenal, wandering restlessly through the noisy Suburra,
or climbing the Caelian in hot haste, to hang on the outskirts of
a levee.<note place="foot">Mart. xii. 18—

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Dum per limina te potentiorum</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">Sudatrix toga ventilat, vagumque</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Major Caelius, et minor fatigat.</l>
</lg></note> Yet in the preface to this last book, Martial seems
to feel his banishment as keenly as Ovid felt his among the
frozen rivers of Scythia.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Trist.</hi> ii. 196; iii. 2, 21, Roma
domusque subit, desideriumque locorum;
cf. Hor. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> ii. 7, 28.</note> He misses in the <q>provincial
solitude</q> the sympathetic public which was eager for his
latest epigram, the fine critical judgment to appreciate, the
concourse of elegant idlers to supply the matter for his verses.<note place="foot">Mart. xii. <hi rend="italic">Praef.</hi> illam judiciorum
subtilitatem, illud materiarum ingenium,
bibliothecas, theatra, conventus,
quasi destituti desideramus.</note>
And worst of all, the most famous wit of Rome is now the
mark for the ignorant spite and envy of a provincial clique.
Martial evidently feels very much as Dr. Johnson would have
felt if he had been compelled to live out his days in Skye.
Juvenal may affect to regret the simple ways of those rustic
places, where on festal days in the grass-grown theatre the
infant in his mother’s arms shudders at the awful masks of
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>the actors, and the aediles take their places in white tunics
like the humble crowd.<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 173 sqq.</note> But, in spite of this sentiment, the
true Roman had a certain contempt for municipal life,<note place="foot">Illustrations may be found in Plaut.
<hi rend="italic">Mil. Glor.</hi> 653; <hi rend="italic">Captiv.</hi> 879; <hi rend="italic">Trinum.</hi>
609; <hi rend="italic">Bacch.</hi> 24; Cic. <hi rend="italic">Phil.</hi> iii. 6, 15,
videte quam despiciamur omnes qui
sumus e municipiis, id est, omnes
plane; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 3, seque ac
majores et posteros municipali adultero
foedabat.</note> for
the narrow range of its interests, the ludicrous assumption of
dignity by its petty magistrates, and its provincialisms.<note place="foot">Juv. x. 100; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">post Red. in
Sen.</hi> 17; Hor. <hi rend="italic">S.</hi> i. 5, 34, Insani
ridentes praemia scribae, etc.</note> It was
indeed only natural that the splendour and the vivid energy
of life in the capital of the world should throw provincial
life into the shade. Yet we can realise now, as a Roman
wit or man of fashion could hardly do, that the municipal
system, which had overspread the world from the Solway
to the edge of the Sahara, was not the least glory of the
Antonine age. And in any attempt to estimate the moral
condition of the masses in that age, the influence of municipal
life should occupy a large place.
</p>

<p>
It is beyond the scope of this work to trace provincial
towns through all their various grades, and their evolution in
the hands of Roman statesmanship from the time of Augustus.
What we are chiefly concerned with is the spirit and the rapid
development of that brilliant civic life, which not only covered
the worlds both of East and West with material monuments of
Roman energy, but profoundly influenced for good, or sometimes
for evil, the popular character. The magical transformation
wrought by Roman rule in a century and a half seized the
imagination of contemporaries such as the rhetor Aristides. And
the mere wreck of that brilliant civilisation which now meets
the traveller’s eye, in regions that have long returned to waste,
will not permit us to treat his eulogy of Rome as only a piece
of rhetoric. Regions, once desert solitudes, are thickly dotted
with flourishing cities; the Empire is a realm of cities. The
world has laid the sword aside, and keeps universal festival,
with all pomp and gladness. All other feuds and rivalries are
gone, and cities now vie with one another only in their splendour
and their pleasures. Every space is crowded with
porticoes, gymnasia, temple fronts, with studios and schools.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiv. (223), 391, (Jebb. i. p.
223),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μία δὲ αὔτη κατέχει ἔρις, ὅπως ἔτι καλλίστη καὶ ἡδίστη ἑκάστη φανείται·
πάντα δὲ μεστὰ γυμνασίων, κρηνῶν, προπυλαίων, νεῶν, δημιουργίων, διδασκάλων.</foreign></note>
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>Sandy wastes, trackless mountains, and broad rivers present no
barriers to the traveller, who finds his home and country
everywhere.  The earth has become a vast pleasure garden.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiv. (225), 393-4,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἡ γῆ πᾶσα οἷον παράδεισος ἐγκηκόσμηται.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
This glowing description of the Roman world of the
Antonine age is not perhaps strengthened by the appeal to the
doubtful statistics of other contemporaries, such as Aelian and
Josephus. We may hesitate to accept the statement that Italy
had once 1197 cities, or that Gaul possessed 1200.<note place="foot">Aelian, <hi rend="italic">V. Hist.</hi> ix. 16,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ᾤκησαν καὶ πόλεις τὴν Ἰταλίαν πάλαι ἑπτὰ καὶ ἐνηνήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν πρὸς ταῖς χιλίαις</foreign>;
Jos. <hi rend="italic">B. J.</hi> ii. 16.</note> In these
estimates, if they have any solid foundation, the term <q>city</q>
must be taken in a very elastic sense. But there are other
more trustworthy reckonings which sufficiently support the
glowing description of Aristides. When the Romans conquered
Spain and Gaul, they found a system of <hi rend="italic">pagi</hi> or cantons,
with very few considerable towns. The 800 towns which
are said to have been taken by Julius Caesar can have been
little more than villages. But the Romanisation of both
countries meant centralisation. Where the Romans did not
find towns they created them.<note place="foot">Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov. Administration</hi>,
p. 203.</note> Gradually, but rapidly, the
isolated rural life became more social and urban. In the
north-eastern province of Spain, out of 293 communities in the
time of the elder Pliny, 179 were in some sense urban, 114
were still purely rustic;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> iii. 4.</note> and we may be sure that this is an
immense advance on the condition of the country at the time
of the conquest. In the reign of Antoninus Pius, only 27 of
these rural districts remained without an organised civic centre.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> i. 73.</note>
In Gaul, Julius Caesar impressed the stamp of Rome on the
province of Narbo, by founding cities of the Roman type, and
his policy was continued by Augustus. The loose cantonal
system almost disappeared from the province in the south,
although it lingered long in the northern regions of Gaul. Yet
even in the north, on the borders of Germany, Cologne, from
the reign of Claudius, became the envy of the barbarians across
the Rhine,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 168; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 36; Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Röm. Staatsverw.</hi> i. 121; Bury, <hi rend="italic">Rom.
Emp.</hi> p. 83.</note> and Trèves, from the days of Augustus, already
anticipated its glory as a seat of empire from Diocletian to
Gratian and Valentinian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C. Theod.</hi> xiii. 3, 11.</note> In the Agri Decumates, between
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>the Rhine and Neckar, the remains of baths and aqueducts, the
mosaics and bronzes and pottery, which antiquarian industry
has collected and explored, attest the existence of at least 160
flourishing and civilised communities.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 125.</note> Baden was already a
crowded resort for its healing waters when, in <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 69, it was
given up to fire and sword by Caecina in his advance to meet
the army of Otho in the valley of the Po.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 67; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> the dedication
of a temple to Isis by a magistrate of
Baden and his wife and daughter; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
457.</note> The Danube was
lined with flourishing communities of Roman origin. In the
170 years during which Dacia was included in the Empire,
more than 120 towns were organised by the conquering race.<note place="foot">Marq. i. 155, in keiner andern
Provinz lässt sich die Entwickelung
der römischen Städteanlagen so genau
verfolgen als in Dacien. Arnold, <hi rend="italic">R.
Prov. Admin.</hi> p. 205.</note>
Greek cities, like Tomi on the Euxine, record their gratitude to
their patrons in the same formal terms as Pompeii or Venusia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5287.</note>
If we may believe Philostratus, there were 500 flourishing
cities in the province of Asia which more than rivalled the
splendour of Ionia before the Lydian and Persian conquests.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. 3.</note>
Many of these were of ancient origin, but many had been
founded by Rome.<note place="foot">Arnold, p. 205; Marq. i. 199.</note> Laodicea was regarded as an unimportant
place in the reign of Tiberius; yet the wealth of its private
citizens was celebrated.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 55; Strab. xii. 578.</note> One of them had attained a fortune
which enabled him to bequeath it a sum of nearly half
a million. The elder Pliny could reckon 40 cities of importance
in Egypt, which had in his time a population of
over seven millions;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> v. 60; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">SG.</hi> iii. 110.</note> and Alexandria, next after Rome herself,
was regarded as the most dazzling ornament of the Empire.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiv. 223 (392),
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πόλις ἐγκαλλώπισμα τῆς ὑμετέρας γέγονεν ἡγεμονίας</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps nowhere, however, had the <q>Roman peace</q> worked
greater miracles of civic prosperity than in North Africa.
That the population of Roman Africa was in the period of
the Empire extraordinarily dense, appears from the number
of its episcopal sees, which in the fifth century had reached
a total of 297.<note place="foot">Cf. Victor, <hi rend="italic">Vit.</hi> i. 7; v. 9; Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">SG.</hi> iii. 110; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Migne, <hi rend="italic">Patrol. Lat.</hi>
t. lviii. 270, notitia Africae.</note> The remains of more than 20 amphitheatres
can still be traced. There is indeed no more startling proof of
the range and sweep of Roman civilisation than the wreck of
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>those capitols, forums, aqueducts, and temples in what are now
sandy solitudes, not even occupied by a native village. In
the province of Numidia, within a few leagues of the Sahara,
the Roman colony of Thamugadi (Timgad) was founded, as an
inscription tells, by Trajan in the year 100.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2355; Cagnat, <hi rend="italic">L’Armée
Rom. d’Afrique</hi>, p. 582; Boissier,
<hi rend="italic">L’Afr. Rom.</hi> p. 180.</note> There, in what
is now a scene of utter loneliness and desolation, the remains
of a busy and well-organised community have been brought to
light by French explorers. The town was built by the third
legion, which for generations, almost as a hereditary caste,
protected Roman civilisation against the restless tribes of the
desert. The chief buildings were probably completed in 117.
The preservation of so much, after eighteen centuries, is a
proof that the work was well and thoroughly done. The ruts
of carriage wheels can still be seen in the main street, which is
spanned by a triumphal arch, adorned with marble columns.
Porticoes and colonnades gave shelter from the heat to the
passers-by, and two fountains played at the further end. Water,
which is now invisible on the spot, was then brought in
channels from the hills, and distributed at a fixed rate among
private houses.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5326.</note> The forum was in the usual style, with raised
side walks and porticoes, a basilica, a senate-house and rostrum,
a shrine of Fortuna Augusta, and a crowd of statues to the
emperors from M. Aurelius to Julian.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Afr. Rom.</hi> p. 187.</note> This petty place had
its theatre, where the seats can still be seen rising in their
due gradation of rank. An imposing capitol, in which, as at
home, the Roman Trinity, Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, were
duly worshipped, was restored in the reign of Valentinian I.,
and dedicated by that Publius Caeionius Albinus who was one
of the last of the pagan aristocracy, and who figures in the
Letters of Symmachus and the <hi rend="italic">Saturnalia</hi> of Macrobius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2388; Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 107,
§ 1; Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i, 2, 15.</note> The
inscriptions on the site reveal the regular municipal constitution,
with the names of seventy decurions, each of whom probably
paid his honorarium of £13 or more when he entered on
his office.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2403; <hi rend="italic">Suppl.</hi> ii. 17903;
<hi rend="italic">Suppl.</hi> i. 12058. This inscription, from
an obscure place, shows how an original
honorarium of HS. 1600 was finally
increased by voluntary generosity to
HS. 12,000.</note> The honours of the duumvirate and the aedileship
cost respectively £32 and £24.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2341, 17838.</note> And here, as elsewhere, the
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>public monuments and buildings were generally erected by
private ambition or munificence. A statue and little shrine
of Fortuna Augusta were given by two ladies, at a cost of over
£200, in the days of Hadrian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii.; <hi rend="italic">Suppl.</hi> ii. 17831.</note>
</p>

<p>
The greatest glory of the imperial administration for
nearly two centuries was the skilful and politic tolerance
with which it reconciled a central despotism with a remarkable
range of local liberty. It did not attempt to impose a
uniform organisation or a bureaucratic control on the vast
mass of races and peoples whom the fortune of Rome had
brought under her sway. Rather, for ages its guiding
principle was, as far as possible, to leave ancient landmarks
undisturbed, and to give as much free play to local liberties
as was compatible with the safety and efficiency of the
imperial guardian of order and peace. Hence those many
diversities in the relation between provincial towns and Rome,
represented by the names of free, federate, or stipendiary
cities, municipium and colonia. Many retained their old
laws, constitution, and judicial system.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 45; Bury, <hi rend="italic">Rom.
Emp.</hi> p. 77; Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.
Admin.</hi> p. 210.</note> They retained in
some cases the names of magistracies, which recalled the
days of independence: there were still archons at Athens,
suffetes in African towns, demarchs at Naples. The title of
medixtuticus still lingered here and there in old Oscan
communities.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3720, 3800, 3801, 3056,
3057, 3804.</note> When she had crushed the national spirit,
and averted the danger of armed revolt, Rome tolerated, and
even fostered, municipal freedom, for more than a hundred
years after the last shadowy pretence of popular government
had disappeared from her own forum.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 15; Momms. <hi rend="italic">Röm.
St.</hi> ii. 1002; Duruy, v. pp. 336-346;
Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Plut.</hi> 221, 237; Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reip. Ger.
Pr.</hi> c. 17, 19. The first curatores
civitatum are heard of in the reigns
of Nerva and Trajan; cf. Marq. i. 510,
n. 10.</note> Central control and
uniformity were established in those departments which
affected the peace and welfare of the whole vast commonwealth.
Although the interference of the provincial governor
in local administration was theoretically possible in varying
degrees, yet it may well be doubted whether a citizen of
Lyons or Marseilles, of Antioch or Alexandria, was often
made conscious of any limitation of his freedom by imperial
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>power. While delation and confiscation and massacre were
working havoc on the banks of the Tiber, the provinces were
generally tranquil and prosperous. The people elected their
magistrates, who administered municipal affairs with little
interference from government. The provincial administration
of a Nero, an Otho, a Vitellius, or a Domitian was often no less
prudent and considerate than that of a Vespasian or a Trajan.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 32; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 6;
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, x.; <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, iii. provinciam
administravit moderatione singulari;
<hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> v. Vespasian had to increase
burdens, Suet. xvi.; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 84;
as to Trajan, cf. Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 20; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> 8. Nero, it is true, is said to
have encouraged plunder (Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>,
32; Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> 18, 6). Yet the
general prosperity was undisturbed,
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> 170; Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Rom.
Prov. Admin.</hi> 135; Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Plut.</hi>
199.</note>
And the worst of the emperors share with the best in the
universal gratitude of the provinces for the blessings of the
<q>Roman peace.</q><note place="foot">See a crowd of inscriptions to
Domitian and Commodus in remote
places in Africa; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 1016,
1019; 10570, 8702, in which Commodus
is described as indulgentissimus
princeps, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
But although for generations there was a settled abstinence
from centralisation on the part of the imperial government,
the many varieties of civic constitution in the provinces
tended by an irresistible drift to a uniform type of organisation.
Free and federate communities voluntarily sought the position
of a colony or a municipium.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 517 sq.; Arnold,
p. 212.</note> Just as the provincial town
must have its capitol, with the cult of Jupiter, Juno, and
Minerva, or imported the street names Velabrum or Vicus
Tuscus, so the little community called itself <hi rend="italic">respublica</hi>, its
commons the <hi rend="italic">populus</hi>, its curia the senate or the <hi rend="italic">amplissimus
et splendidissimus ordo</hi>; its magistrates sometimes bore the
majestic names of praetor, dictator, or censor, in a few cases
even of consul.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Henz.</hi> iii. <hi rend="italic">Ind.</hi> p. 156; Inscr. 2322,
6980, 4983; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 477.
There were consuls at Tusculum and
Beneventum. But the grand style was
ridiculed by Cicero, <hi rend="italic">In Pis.</hi> xi. 24.</note> This almost ludicrous imitation of the great
city is an example of the magical power which Rome always
exercised on her most distant subjects, and even on the outer
world of barbarism, down to the last days when her forces
were ebbing away. The ease and rapidity of communication
along the great routes, the frequent visits of proconsuls and
procurators and generals, with the numerous train which
attended them, the presence of the ubiquitous Roman merchant
and traveller, kept even remote places in touch with the
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>capital. The <hi rend="italic">acta diurna</hi>, with official news and bits of
scandal and gossip, regularly arrived in distant provincial
towns and frontier camps.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 31; xvi. 22, diurna
per provincias, per exercitus curatius
leguntur. Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> i. 212;
Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 191; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i.
88; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 11813; Lamprid.
<hi rend="italic">Com.</hi> 15.</note> The last speech of Pliny, or the
freshest epigrams of Martial, were within a short time selling
on the bookstalls of Lyons or Vienne.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ix. 11, 2; Mart. vii. 88.</note> Until the appearance of
railways and steamboats, it may be doubted whether there was
any age in history in which travelling was easier or more general.
</p>

<p>
Apart from the immense stimulus which was given to
trade and commerce by the pacification of the world, liberal
curiosity, or restless ennui, or the passion to preach and
propagate ideas, carried immense numbers to the most distant
lands.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 28, 104; Luc. <hi rend="italic">Tox.</hi> 27;
<hi rend="italic">De Dips.</hi> 6; <hi rend="italic">Philops.</hi> 33; <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> 44;
Epict. <hi rend="italic">Dis.</hi> iii. 13.</note> The travelling sophist found his way to towns on the
edge of the Scythian steppes, to the home of the Brahmans,
or to the depths of the Soudan.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iii. 50, vi.;
D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 36.</note> The tour up the Nile was
part of a liberal culture in the days of Lucian as it was in the
days of Herodotus. The romantic charm of travel in Greece
was probably heightened for many by the tales of Thessalian
brigands and sorceresses which meet us in the novel of
Apuleius. The Emperor Hadrian, who visited almost every
interesting scene in his dominions, from the Solway to the
Euphrates, often trudging for days at the head of his soldiers,
is a true representative of the migratory tastes of his time.
Seneca, indeed, finds in this rage for change of scene only
a symptom of the universal unrest. Epictetus, on the other
hand, and Aristides expatiate with rapture on the universal
security and wellbeing, due to the disappearance of brigandage,
piracy, and war. The seas are alive with merchantmen;
deserts have become populous scenes of industry; the
great roads are carried over the broadest rivers and the most
defiant mountain barriers. The earth has become the common
possession of all. Nor is this mere rhetoric. Travelling to all
parts of the known world had become expeditious, and even
luxurious. From the Second Punic War, traders, couriers, and
travellers had moved freely along the great roads.<note place="foot">Hudemann, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. des röm. Postwesens</hi>,
p. 8 <anchor id="corr205"/><corr sic="sq.">sq.;</corr> Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i.
417; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">SG.</hi> ii. 8.</note> The
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>government post, which was first organised by Augustus on
the model of the Persian, provided at regular intervals the
means of conveyance for officials, or for those furnished with
the requisite diploma. Private enterprise had also organised
facilities of travel, and at the gates of country towns such as
Pompeii, Praeneste, or Tibur, there were stations of the posting
corporations (the <hi rend="italic">cisiarii</hi> or <hi rend="italic">jumentarii</hi>) where carriages could
be hired, with change of horses at each stage.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4093, 2413, 5163, 6983.</note> The speed
with which great distances were traversed in those days is at
first sight rather startling. Caesar once travelled 100 miles
a day in a journey from Rome to the Rhone.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> 57.</note> The freedman
Icelus in seven days carried the news of Nero’s death to Galba
in Spain,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Galba</hi>, 7.</note> the journey of 332 miles from Tarraco to Clunia
having been made at the rate of nearly ten miles an hour.
This of course was express speed. The ordinary rate of
travelling is probably better represented by the leisurely
journey of Horace and Maecenas to Brundisium, or that of
Martial’s book from Tarraco to Bilbilis.<note place="foot">Mart. x. 104; cf. Hor. <hi rend="italic">S.</hi> i. 5, 104.</note> About 130 miles a
day was the average distance accomplished by sea. Vessels put
out from Ostia or Puteoli for every port in the Mediterranean.
From Puteoli to Corinth was a voyage of five days. About
the same time was needed to reach Tarraco from Ostia. A
ship might arrive at Alexandria from the Palus Maeotis in a
fortnight.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">SG.</hi> ii. 12 sqq.</note> Many a wandering sophist, like Dion Chrysostom
or Apollonius of Tyana, traversed great distances on foot, or
with a modest wallet on a mule. The rhetor Aristides once
spent a hundred days in a journey at mid-winter from Mysia
to Rome.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxiv. 537; cf. Hor. <hi rend="italic">S.</hi>
i. 6, 105.</note> But there was hardly any limit to the luxury and
ostentatious splendour with which the great and opulent made
their progresses, attended or preceded by troops of footmen and
runners, and carrying with them costly plate and myrrhine
vases.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 123, § 7.</note> The thousand carriages which Nero took with him on a
progress, the silver-shod mules of Poppaea, the paraphernalia of
luxury described by Seneca, if they are not mythical, were
probably the exceptional displays of a self-indulgence bordering
on lunacy.<note place="foot">Cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xliv. xxx.; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 87, § 9; 123.</note> But practical and sensible comfort in travelling
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>was perhaps then commoner than it was, until quite recently,
among ourselves. The carriages in which the two indefatigable
Plinies used to ride, enabled them to read at their ease, or dictate
to an amanuensis.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 5, 15; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi>
xxxiii.; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">SG.</hi> ii. 19.</note> The inns, from the time of Horace to the
time of Sidonius, were as a rule bad, and frequently disreputable,
and even dangerous, places of resort.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> i. 7; i. 17; Sidon.
Apoll. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 11. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Soc. in
the Last Century of the Western Empire</hi>,
p. 172 (1st ed.); Friedl. ii. 20.</note> And vehicles were
often arranged for sleeping on a journey. We may be sure
that many an imperial officer after the time of Julius Caesar
passed nights in his carriage, while hurrying to join the forces
on the Rhine or the Danube. With all this rapid circulation
of officials and travellers, the far-stretching limits of the
Roman world must, to the general eye, have contracted, the
remotest places were drawn more and more towards the centre,
and the inexhaustible vitality of the imperial city diffused itself
with a magical power of silent transformation.
</p>

<p>
The modes in which the fully developed municipalities of
the Antonine age had originated and were organised were
very various. Wherever, as in the Greek East or Carthaginian
Africa, towns already existed, the Romans, of course, used them
in their organisation of a province, although they added liberally
to the number, as in Syria, Pontus, and Cappadocia.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 17, 199, 214, 317;
Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Prov. Adm.</hi> 203.</note> Where
a country was still in the cantonal state, the villages or markets
were grouped around a civic centre, and a municipal town,
such as Nîmes or Lyons, would thus become the metropolis
of a considerable tract of territory. The colony of Vienne was
the civic centre of the Allobroges.<note place="foot">Arn. 205, 208; Marq. i. 114, 118.</note> In the settlement of the
Alps many of the remote mountain cantons were attached to
towns such as Tridentum, Verona, or Brixia.<note place="foot">Marq. i. 14.</note> Sometimes, as
in Dacia, the civic organisation was created at a stroke.<note place="foot">Id. i. 155.</note> But
it is well known that, especially towards the frontiers of the
Empire, in Britain, on the Rhine, and in North Africa, the
towns of the second century had often grown out of the <hi rend="italic">castra
stativa</hi> of the legions.
</p>

<p>
The great reorganisation of Augustus had made each legion
a permanent corps, with a history and identity of its own.
To ensure the tranquillity of the Empire the legions were
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>distributed in permanent camps along the frontier, the only
inland cities with a regular military garrison being Lyons and
Carthage.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Afr. Rom.</hi> p. 104.</note> Many legions never changed their quarters for
generations. The Tertia Augusta, which has left so many
memorials of itself in the inscriptions of Lambaesis, remained,
with only a single break, in the same district from the time
of Augustus to that of Diocletian.<note place="foot">See the history of this legion in
Cagnat, <hi rend="italic">L’Armée Rom. d’Afrique</hi>, p.
148 sqq. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii., Momms. <hi rend="italic">Praef.</hi>
xix. sq. The legion was first stationed
at Thevesta.</note> There, for two generations,
it kept sleepless watch against the robber tribes of the
Sahara. The legion was also peacefully employed in erecting
fortifications and making roads and bridges, when the camp was
visited by Hadrian in the year 130.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5319; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2532,
10048; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Mommsen, p. 21. For the
date of this visit, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Cagnat, p. 154.
<hi rend="italic">Vit. Hadr.</hi> 12, 13.</note> Gradually soldiers were
allowed to form family relations, more or less regular, until,
under Septimius Severus, the legionary was permitted to live
in his household like any other citizen.<note place="foot">Herodian, iii. 8; cf. Cagnat, p. 451.</note> From the remains
at Lambaesis, it is now considered certain that, in the third
century, the camp had ceased to be the soldier’s home. The
suttlers and camp-followers had long gathered in the neighbourhood
of the camp, in huts which were called <hi rend="italic">Canabae legionis</hi>.
There, for a long time, the soldier, when off duty, sought his
pleasures and amusements, and there, after the changes of
Septimius Severus, he took up his abode. At first the
Canabae of Lambaesis was only a <hi rend="italic">vicus</hi>; it became, under
Marcus Aurelius, a <hi rend="italic">municipium</hi>—the <hi rend="italic">Respublica Lambaesitanorum</hi>,
with the civic constitution which is rendered familiar to
us by so many inscriptions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2611; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7408.</note> The Legionaries seem to have
been happy and contented at Lambaesis; their sons were trained
to arms and followed their fathers in the ranks;<note place="foot">Cagnat, 365, 453; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii.
3015.</note> the legion
became to some extent a hereditary caste. Old veterans
remained on the scene of their service, after receiving their
discharge with a pension from the chest.<note place="foot">Cagnat, 481-87; Marq. ii. 544.</note> The town developed
in the regular fashion, and dignified itself by a capitol,
an amphitheatre, two forums, a triumphal arch; and the many
monuments of public and private life found on the site reveal
a highly organised society, moulded out of barbarous and alien
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>elements, and stamped with the inimitable and enduring
impress of Rome. Out of such casual and unpromising
materials sprang numbers of urban communities, which reproduced,
in their outline and in their social tone, the forms and
spirit of the free Republic of Rome. The capitol and the
forum are merely the external symbols of a closer bond of
parentage. The Roman military discipline did not more
completely master and transform the Numidian or Celtic
recruit, than the inspiration of her civil polity diffused among
races imbruted by servitude, or instinct with the love of
a lawless, nomadic freedom, the sober attachment to an ordered
civic life which was obedient to a long tradition, yet vividly
interested in its own affairs.
</p>

<p>
On hardly any side of ancient life is the information
furnished by the inscriptions so rich as on the spirit and
organisation of municipalities. Here one may learn details of
communal life which are never alluded to in Roman literature.
From this source, also, we must seek the only authentic
materials for the reconstruction of a municipality of the first
century. The <hi rend="italic">Album Canusii</hi> and the tablets containing the
laws of Malaga and Salpensa have not only settled more than
one question as to the municipal organisation of the early
Empire, but have enabled us to form almost as clear-cut a
conception of it as we have of the corporate organisation of
our own great towns.
</p>

<p>
But, unlike our civic republics, the Roman municipal town
was distinctly aristocratic, or rather timocratic, in its constitution.
A man’s place in the community, as a rule, was fixed by his
ancestry, his official grade, or his capacity to spend. The
dictum of Trimalchio was too literally true in the municipal
life of that age—<q>a man is what he is worth.</q> Provincial
society was already parted and graduated, though less decidedly,
by those rigid lines of materialistic demarcation which became
gaping fissures in the society of the Theodosian code. The
Curia or Senate was open only to the possessor of a certain
fortune; at Como, for instance, HS.100,000, elsewhere perhaps
even more. On the other hand, the richest freedman could not
become a member of the Curia or hold any civic magistracy,<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 499; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 29; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 19;
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Afr. Rom.</hi> p. 195.</note>
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>although he might be decorated with their insignia. His
ambition had to be satisfied with admission to the order of
the Augustales, which ranked socially after the members of the
Curia. In the list of the Curia, which was revised every five
years, the order of official and social precedence was most
scrupulously observed. In the Album Canusii of the year
<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 223,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3721; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.
Einl.</hi> 30.</note> the first rank is assigned to thirty-nine patrons,
who have held imperial office, or who are senators or knights.
Next come the local magnates who have been dignified by
election to any of the four great municipal magistracies.
Last in order are the <hi rend="italic">pedani</hi>, that is, the citizens possessing
the requisite qualification, who have not yet held any municipal
office. At the bottom of the list stand twenty-five <hi rend="italic">praetextati</hi>,
who were probably the sons of the more distinguished
citizens, and who, like the sons of senators of the Republic,
were silent witnesses of the proceedings in the Curia. From
this body, and from all the magistracies, all persons engaged
in certain mean or disgraceful occupations were expressly
excluded, along with the great mass of the poorer citizens,
the <hi rend="italic">tenuiores</hi>. The taint of servile birth, the possession of
<hi rend="italic">libertinae opes</hi>, was an indelible blot. In countless inscriptions
this gradation of rank is sharply accentuated. If a man leaves
a bequest for an annual feast, with a distribution of money, the
rich patron or the decurio will receive perhaps five times the
amount which is doled out to the simple plebeian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6989, 7001, 7199, ob
duplam sportulam collatum sibi, 4020,
3703.</note> The distinction
of rank, even in punishment for crime, which meets
us everywhere in the Theodosian Code, has already appeared.
The <hi rend="italic">honestior</hi> is not to be degraded by the punishment of
crucifixion or by the stroke of the rod.<note place="foot">Hartmann, <hi rend="italic">De Exilio</hi>, pp. 58 sq.;
Duruy, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Rom.</hi> vi. 643.</note> But it is on their
tombs that the passion of the Romans for some sort of distinction,
however shadowy, shows itself most strikingly. On these slabs
every grade of dignity in a long career is enumerated with
minute care. The exact value of a man’s public benefactions
or his official salary will be recorded with pride.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 946, 3708.</note> Even the
dealer in aromatics or in rags will make a boast of some petty
office in the college of his trade.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7192.</note> But, although rank and office
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>were extravagantly valued in these societies, wealth was after
all the great distinction. The cities were in the hands of the
rich, and, in return for social deference and official power, the
rich were expected to give lavishly to all public objects. The
worship of wealth, the monumental flattery of rich patrons and
benefactors, was very interested and servile. On the other
hand, there probably never was a time when the duties of wealth
were so powerfully enforced by opinion, or so cheerfully, and
even recklessly, performed.
</p>

<p>
Yet, although these communities were essentially aristocratic
in tone and constitution, the commonalty still retained some
power in the Antonine age. On many inscriptions they appear
side by side with the Curial <q>ordo</q> and the Augustales.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3703, 3706, 4009, 3937,
3704, 3725, 4020; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 111; cf.
Ohnesseit, <hi rend="italic">De Jure Municip.</hi> 41.</note> They
had still in the reign of Domitian the right to elect their
magistrates. It was long believed that, with the suppression
of popular elections at Rome in the reign of Tiberius, the
popular choice of their great magistrates must also have been
withdrawn from municipal towns.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 472.</note> This has now been disproved
by the discovery of the laws of Malaga and Salpensa,
in which the most elaborate provisions are made for a free and
uncontaminated election by the whole people.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.
    <anchor id="corr211"/><corr sic="Henz,">Henz.</corr></hi> 7421; <hi rend="italic">Lex Mal.</hi> §§ 53, 55.</note> And we can
still almost hear the noise of election days among the ruins of
Pompeii.<note place="foot">Mau, 376, 388-89 (Tr.).</note> Many of the inscriptions of Pompeii are election
placards, recommending particular candidates. There, in red
letters painted on the walls, we can read that <q>the barbers
wish to have Trebius as aedile,</q> or that <q>the fruit-sellers, with
one accord, support the candidature of Holconius Priscus for
the duumvirate.</q> The porters, muleteers, and garlic dealers
have each their favourite. The master fuller, Vesonius Primus,
backs Cn. Helvius as a worthy man. Even ladies took
part in the contest and made their separate appeals. <q>His
little sweetheart</q> records that she is working for Claudius.<note place="foot">Claudium iivir. animula facit, <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iv. 425, 677, 644.</note>
Personal popularity no doubt then, as always, attracted such
electoral support. But the student of the inscriptions may be
inclined to think that the free and independent electors had
also a keen eye for the man who was likely to build a new
colonnade for the forum, or a new <hi rend="italic">schola</hi> for the guild, or, best
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>of all, to send down thirty pairs of gladiators into the arena
<q>with plenty of blood.</q><note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 45, ferrum optimum
daturus est, sine fuga, carnarium in
medio, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
The laws of Malaga and Salpensa prescribe, in the fullest
detail, all the forms to be observed in the election of magistrates.
These were generally six in number—two duumvirs,<note place="foot">The title of the highest magistracy
varied a good deal: cf. Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi>
i. 475, 89, <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> iii. <hi rend="italic">Ind.</hi> 154.</note> who were
the highest officers, two aediles, and two quaestors, for each year.
Every fifth year, instead of the duumvirs, two <hi rend="italic">quinquennales</hi>
were elected, with the extraordinary duty of conducting the
municipal census.<note place="foot">Marq. i. 485; <hi rend="italic">Henz. Ind.</hi> p. 157.
Often described as iivir quinquennalis,
or iivir censoria potestate quinq. etc.,
or shortly quinquennalis; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
3882, 3721.</note> The candidates for all these offices were
required to be free born, of the age of twenty-five at least, of
irreproachable character, and the possessors of a certain fortune.
The qualifications were the same as those prescribed by the <hi rend="italic">lex
Julia</hi> for admission to the municipal Senate, which expressly
excluded persons engaged in certain disreputable callings—gladiators,
actors, pimps, auctioneers, and undertakers.<note place="foot">Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Prov. Adm.</hi> pp. 225, 226.</note> In
the best days the competition for office was undoubtedly keen,
and the candidates were numerous. In the year <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 4, the year
of the death of C. <anchor id="corr212"/><corr sic="Cæsar">Caesar</corr>, the grandson of Augustus, so hot was
the rivalry that the town of Pisa was left without magistrates
owing to serious disturbances at the elections.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 643.</note> But it is an
ominous fact that the law of Malaga, in the reign of Domitian,
makes provision for the contingency of a failure of candidates.
In such a case the presiding duumvir was to nominate the required
number, they in turn an equal number, and the combined
nominees had to designate a third set equal in number to themselves.
The choice of the people was then restricted to these
involuntary candidates. The city has evidently advanced a stage
towards the times of the Lower Empire, when the magistrates
were appointed by the Curia from among themselves, with no
reference to the people.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Lex Malag.</hi> § 51; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 7421; Marq.
i. 475; <hi rend="italic">C. Th.</hi> xii. 5, 1.</note> A man might, indeed, well hesitate
before offering himself for an office which imposed a heavy expenditure
on the holder of it. The honorarium payable on
admission amounted, in an obscure place like Thamugadi, to
about £32 for the duumvirate, and £24 for the aedileship.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2341, 17838.</note> In
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>the greater Italian cities it probably would be much more; at
Pompeii the newly elected duumvir paid more than £80.<note place="foot">Marq. i. 499 n. 13.</note> But
the man chosen by the people often felt bound to outstrip the
bare demands of law or custom by a prodigal liberality. He
must build or repair some public work, to signalise his year of
office, and, at the dedication of it, good taste required him to
exhibit costly games, or to give a banquet to the citizens, with a
largess to all of every rank small or great.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7080, 7082, 3811, 3817, 3882.</note>
</p>

<p>
But in return for its liabilities, the position of a duumvir
gave undoubted power and distinction. The office was the
image or shadow of the ancient consulship, and occasionally,
as the inscriptions attest, a Hadrian or an Antoninus Pius
did not disdain to accept it.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3817; cf. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 19.</note> The duumvirs commanded the
local militia, when it was, on emergency, called out.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Lex Urson.</hi> § 103.</note> They
presided at meetings of the people and the Curia, they proposed
questions for their deliberation, and carried the decrees
into effect. They had civil jurisdiction up to a certain
amount, and their criminal jurisdiction, which, in the third
century, had been transferred to imperial functionaries, was,
according to the most probable opinion, undiminished at least
down to the end of the first century.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 28;
Duruy, v. 349 sqq.</note> This judicial power,
however, was limited by the <hi rend="italic">intercessio</hi> of colleagues and the
right of appeal. They had extensive responsibilities in finance,
for the collection of dues and taxes, and the recovery of all
moneys owing to the municipality.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Lex Malag.</hi> § 60 sq.</note> After the fall of the
free Republic, when so many avenues of ambition were closed,
many an able man might well satisfy his desire for power
and distinction by the duumvirate of a provincial town.
</p>

<p>
The Curia, or local senate, is peculiarly interesting to the historical
student, because it was to the conversion of the curiales
into a hereditary caste, loaded with incalculable liabilities,
that the decay of the Western Empire was to a large extent
due.<note place="foot">See <hi rend="italic">Roman Society in the Last
Century of the Western Empire</hi>, bk.
iii. c. 2.</note> But, in the reign of Domitian, the Curia is still erect
and dignified. Although the individual decurio seldom or never
assumes the title senator in the inscriptions,<note place="foot">There is one case in <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2279.</note> the Curia as a
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>whole often bears the august name and titles of the majestic
Roman Senate.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> vol. iii. <hi rend="italic">Ind.</hi> p. 152.</note> And assuredly down to the middle of the
second century there was no lack of candidates for admission.
Every five years the roll of the Curia was revised and drawn
up afresh by the quinquennales. The conditions were those
for holding a magistracy, including a property qualification,
which varied in different places.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 19; at Como the census
was HS.100,000; cf. Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 44.</note> The number of ordinary
members was generally 100.<note place="foot">The Curia is sometimes designated
as Cviri, <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 764, 3737, 1552.
Or., however, interprets CV. as Civium
universorum in 764.</note> But it was swelled by patrons
and other extraordinary members. The quinquennales, in
framing the list, took first the members on the roll of the
previous term, and then those who had been elected to
magistracies since the last census. If any vacancies were still
left, they were filled up from the ranks of those who, not
having yet held any municipal office, were otherwise qualified
by the possession of a sufficient fortune.<note place="foot">Ohnesseit, <hi rend="italic">De Jure Municip.</hi> p.
55; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 504.</note> In the <hi rend="italic">Album
Canusii</hi>, the men who had held official rank constitute at least
two-thirds of the Curia. In the composition of such a body
there would appear to be ample security for administrative
skill and experience. And yet we shall find that it was
precisely through want of prudence or skill that the door was
opened for that bureaucratic interference which, in the second
century, began, with momentous results, to sap the freedom
and independence of municipal life.
</p>

<p>
The honours and powers of the provincial council were
long sufficient to compensate the decurio for the heavy
demands made upon his generosity. To all but comparatively
few the career of imperial office and distinction was closed.
His own town became each man’s <q>patria,</q> as Como was even
to a man like Pliny, who played so great a part in the life of
the capital.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 13, 9.</note> There is the ring of a very genuine public spirit
and a love for the local commonwealth in a host of the
inscriptions of that age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">e.g.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3703, 7190.</note> The vastness and overwhelming
grandeur of a world-wide Empire, in which the individual
citizen was a mere atom, made men crave for any distinction
which seemed to raise them above the grey flat level which
surrounds a democratic despotism. And even the ordinary
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>decurio had some badges to mark him off from the crowd.
The pompous honorific titles of the Lower Empire, indeed,
had not come into vogue. But the Curial had a place of
honour at games and festivals, a claim to a larger share in
the distributions of money by private benefactors, exemption,
as one of the <hi rend="italic">honestiores</hi>, from the more degrading forms of
punishment, the free supply of water from the public sources,<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 31.</note>
and other perquisites and honours, which varied in different
localities. The powers of the Curia were also very considerable.
The duumvirs indeed possessed extensive prerogatives
which strong men may have sometimes strained.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 22. This autocratic
act was the abolition of the games at
Vienne by a duumvir.</note> But there
was a right of appeal to the Curia from judicial decisions of
the duumvirs in certain cases. And their control of games and
festivals, and of the finances of the community, was limited
by the necessity of consulting the Curia and of carrying out
its orders.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Lex Urson.</hi> § 129.</note> In the <hi rend="italic">lex Ursonensis</hi> we find a long list of
matters on which the duumvirs were obliged to take their instructions
from the Curia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 99; Ohnesseit, <hi rend="italic">De Jure
Municip.</hi> p. 51.</note> The quorum needed for a valid
decision varied in different places. In the election of a patron
a quorum of two-thirds of the decurions was legally required.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 53; <hi rend="italic">Lex Urson.</hi> §§ 96, 97,
130.</note>
The names of the duoviri appeared at the head of every curial
decree, as those of the consuls in every senatusconsultum.
</p>

<p>
After the local aristocracy of curial rank came, in order of
social precedence, members of the knightly class and the order
of the Augustales. In the latter half of the first century equestrian
rank had been conferred with perhaps too lavish a hand.
And satire was never tired of ridiculing these sham aristocrats,
Bithynian knights as they were called, often of the lowest
origin, who on public occasions vulgarly asserted their mushroom
rank.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 29; v. 14; v. 23; Juv.
i. 28; iii. 131, 159.</note> In particular, the army contributed many new
knights to the society of the provincial towns. A veteran,
often of humble birth, who had risen to the first place among
the sixty centurions of a legion, was, on his discharge with
a good pension, sometimes raised to equestrian rank. He
frequently returned to his native place, where he became a
personage of some mark. Such men, along with old officers of
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>higher grade, frequently appear in the inscriptions invested
with priesthoods and high magistracies,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7002, 7018, 3785, 3789,
3798, 3733, 3747.</note> and were sometimes
chosen as patrons of the community.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2287, 3714, 3851.</note> Many of them were
undoubtedly good and public-spirited men, with the peculiar
virtues which the life of the Roman camp engendered. But
some of their class also displayed that coarse and brutal self-assertion,
and that ignorant contempt for the refinement of
culture, on which Persius and Juvenal poured their scorn.<note place="foot">Pers. iii. 77; Juv. xvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Augustales, ranking next to the curial order, are peculiarly
interesting, both as representing the wide diffusion of
the cult of the emperors, and as a class composed of men of
low, or even servile origin, who had made their fortunes in
trade, yet whose ambition society found the means of satisfying,
without breaking down the barriers of aristocratic exclusiveness.<note place="foot">In the Inscr. they are mentioned
after the decurions and before the
plebs; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4009, 3807, 1167.
On the distinction between the Augustales
and the Seviri Aug. <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 514; Ohnesseit, <hi rend="italic">De Jure
Munic.</hi> 46; Nessling, <hi rend="italic">De Seviris Aug.</hi>
    <anchor id="corr216"/><corr sic="(italics removed)">Marq.</corr> says, scheinen die Augustales
als lebenslängliche Mitglieder des
Collegiums, die Seviri als jährlich
<anchor id="corr216a"/><corr sic="wechselude">wechselnde</corr> Beamte desselben zu betrachten
zu sein.</note>
The origin of the order of the Augustales was long a subject of
debate. But it has now been placed beyond doubt that in
the provincial towns it was a plebeian institution for the cult
of Augustus, and succeeding emperors, modelled on the aristocratic
order of the Sodales Augustales, which was established
by Tiberius in the capital.<note place="foot">Marq. i. 513; Ohnesseit, p. 46; cf.
<hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3959, 7089; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i.
54, 73.</note> The Augustales were elected by
vote of the local curia, without regard to social rank, although
probably with due respect to wealth, and they included the
leaders of the great freedman class, whose emergence is one of
the most striking facts in the social history of the time.
Figuring on scores of inscriptions, the Augustales are mentioned
only once in extant Roman literature, in the novel of Petronius,
where the class has been immortalised, and probably caricatured.<note place="foot">Petron. 65, 71.</note>
The inscription, for which Trimalchio gives an order to his
brother Augustal, the stone-cutter, is to record his election in
absence to the Sevirate, his many virtues and his millions.
Actual monuments at Assisi and Brescia show that Trimalchio
was not an altogether imaginary person.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2983; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> v. 4482.</note>
</p>
    
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>

<p>
Yet the Augustales, in spite of the vulgar ostentation and
self-assertion, which have characterised similar classes of the
<hi rend="italic">nouveaux riches</hi> in all ages, were a very important and useful
order. They overspread the whole Roman world in the West.
Their monuments have been traced, not only in almost every
town in Italy, and in great provincial capitals, like Lyons or
Tarraco, but in Alpine valleys and lonely outposts of civilisation
on the edge of the Sahara.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3917, 3924, 1561, 7092,
4077, 3127, 4020, 5655, 2374.</note> Their special religious duties
involved considerable expense, from which no doubt the more
aristocratic class were glad to be relieved. They had to bear
the cost of sacrifices and festivities on certain days in honour
of dead emperors. They had to pay an entrance fee on
admission to the college, which the ambitious among them
would often lavishly exceed.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 37.</note> They were organised on the
lines of other colleges, with patrons, quinquennales, and other
officials. They had their club-houses where their banquets
were regularly held, they possessed landed property, and had
their common places of burial.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3787-8; 7103.</note> But their expenditure and
their interests were by no means limited to their own immediate
society. They regarded themselves, and were generally
treated as public officials, ranking next to the magistrates of
the Curia. They had the right to wear the purple-bordered
toga, and to have lictors attending them in the streets.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 65.</note> Places
of honour were reserved for them at the games and festivals.
Although as a class they were not eligible for a seat in the
Curia, or for the municipal magistracies, yet the <hi rend="italic">ornamenta</hi>, the
external badges and honours attached to these offices, were
sometimes granted even to freedmen who had done service to
the community. Thus an Augustal who had paved a road at
Cales received the <hi rend="italic">ornamenta</hi> of a decurio.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6983.</note> And another, for
his munificence to Pompeii, by a decree of the Curia, was
awarded the use of the <hi rend="italic">bisellium</hi>, a seat of honour which was
usually reserved for the highest dignitaries.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4044, 7094.</note> But the ornaments
and dignities of their own particular college became
objects of pride and ambition. Thus a man boasts of having
been made <hi rend="italic">primus Augustalis perpetuus</hi>, by a decree of the
Curia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7112.</note> A worthy of Brundisium received from the Curia a
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>public funeral, with the ornaments and insignia of an Augustal.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ix. 58.</note>
In this way, in a society highly conventional, and dominated
by caste feeling, the order of the Augustales provided both a
stimulus and a reward for the public spirit of a new class,
powerful in its wealth and numbers, but generally encumbered
by the heritage of a doubtful origin. It was a great elevation
for a man, who, perhaps, had been sold as a boy in some
Syrian slave market into the degradation of a minion, and
who had emerged, by petty savings or base services, into the
comparative freedom of a tainted or despised trade, to find
himself at last holding a conspicuous rank in his municipality,
and able to purchase honour and deference from those who
had trampled on him in his youth.
</p>

<p>
The Augustales shared with the members of the Curia the
heavy burdens which public sentiment then imposed upon the
rich. Direct taxation for municipal purposes was in the first
century almost unknown. The municipalities often possessed
landed property, mines, or quarries. Capua is said to have had
distant possessions in the island of Crete.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 42.</note> The towns also
derived an income from the public baths,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 8, 6.</note> from the rent
of shops and stalls in the public places, from the supply
of water to private houses or estates, and from port dues
and tolls. A very considerable item of revenue must have
been found in the fee which all decurions, Augustales, and
magistrates paid on entering on their office or dignity.
Since the reign of Nerva, the towns had the right of receiving
legacies and bequests.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 43.</note> And, on the occurrence of any desolating
calamity, an earthquake or a fire, the emperor was never
slow or niggardly in giving relief. In the year 53 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> the town
of Bologna received an imperial subsidy of about £83,000.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 58.</note>
The cities of Asia were again and again relieved after desolating
earthquakes.<note place="foot">Sueton. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> 13; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 47;
cf. Nipperdey’s note referring to the
monument erected to Tiberius in <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>
30, at Puteoli.</note>
</p>

<p>
With regard to municipal expenditure, the budget was free
from many public charges which burden our modern towns.
The higher offices were unpaid, and in fact demanded large
generosity from their holders. The lower functions were dis<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>charged, to a great extent, by communal slaves. The care or
construction of streets, markets, and public buildings, although
theoretically devolving on the community through their aediles,
was, as a matter of fact, to an enormous extent undertaken by
private persons. The city treasury must have often incurred
a loss in striving to provide corn and oil for the citizens at a
limited price, and the authorities were often reviled, as at Trimalchio’s
banquet, for not doing more to cheapen the necessaries
of life.<note place="foot">Petron. 44.</note> Although our information as to municipal expenditure
on education and medical treatment is scanty, it is pretty clear
that the community was, in the Antonine age, beginning to
recognise a duty in making provision for both. Vespasian
first gave a public endowment to professors of rhetoric in the
capital.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xviii. Latinis Graecisque
rhetoribus annua centena constituit.</note> The case of Como, described in Pliny’s Letters,
was probably not an isolated one. Finding that the youth
of that town were compelled to resort to Milan for higher
instruction, Pliny, as we have seen, proposed to the parents to
establish by general subscription a public school, and he offered
himself to contribute one-third of the sum required for the
foundation, the rest to be provided by the townsfolk, who were
to have the management and selection of teachers in their
hands.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 13.</note> The Greek cities had public physicians 500 years
before Christ,<note place="foot">Herodot. iii. 131.</note> and Marseilles and some of the Gallic towns in
Strabo’s day employed both teachers and doctors at the public
expense.<note place="foot">Strab. iv. c. i. 5 (181),
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">σοφιστὰς γοῦν ὑποδέχονται ... κοινῄ μισθούμενοι καθάπερ καὶ ἰατρούς</foreign>.</note> The regular organisation of public medical attendance
in the provinces dates from Antoninus Pius, who required
the towns of Asia to have a certain number of physicians
among their salaried officers.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> ii. 777.</note> The title <hi rend="italic">Archiater</hi>, which in
the Theodosian Code designates an official class in the provinces
as well as at Rome, is found in inscriptions of Beneventum
and Pisaurum belonging to an earlier date.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3994, 4017.</note> But these
departments of municipal expenditure were hardly yet fully
organised in the age of the Antonines, and were probably not
burdensome. The great field of expenditure lay in the
basilicas, temples, amphitheatres, baths, and pavements, whose
<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>vanishing remains give us a glimpse of one of the most brilliant
ages in history.
</p>

<p>
The municipal towns relied largely on the voluntary munificence
of their wealthy members for great works of public utility
or splendour. But we have many records of such enterprises
carried out at the common expense, and the name of a special
magistracy (<hi rend="italic">curator operum publicorum</hi>) to superintend them
meets us often in the inscriptions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3716, 6709, 7146.</note> These undertakings were
frequently on a great scale. The famous bridge of Alcantara
was erected in the reign of Trajan by the combined efforts of
eleven municipalities in Portugal.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. 116; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. pp. 89-96.</note> In Bithynia the finances of
some of the great towns had been so seriously disorganised by
expensive and ill-managed undertakings that the younger Pliny
was in the year 111 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> sent as imperial legate by Trajan to repair
the misgovernment of the province.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 17.</note> Pliny’s correspondence
throws a flood of light on many points of municipal administration,
and foreshadows its coming decay. The cities appear
to have ample funds, but they are grossly mismanaged. There
is plenty of public money seeking investment, but borrowers
cannot be found at the current rate of 12 per cent. Pliny
would have been inclined to compel the decurions to become
debtors of the state, but Trajan orders the rate of interest to be
put low enough to attract voluntary borrowers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 54, 55, 23.</note> Apamea,
although it had the ancient privilege of managing its own affairs,
requested Pliny to examine the public accounts.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 47.</note> He did the
same for Prusa, and found many signs of loose and reckless
finance, and probable malversation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 17.</note> Nicaea had spent £80,000
on a theatre, which, from some faults either in the materials
or the foundation, was settling, with great fissures in the walls.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 39.</note>
The city had also expended a large sum in rebuilding its
gymnasium on a sumptuous scale, but the fabric had been
condemned by a new architect for radical defects of structure.
Nicomedia has squandered £40,000 on two aqueducts which
have either fallen or been abandoned.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 37.</note> In authorising the construction
of a third the emperor might well emphatically order
the responsibility for such blunders to be fastened on the proper
<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>persons.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 38.</note> In the same city, when a fire of a most devastating
kind had recently occurred, there was no engine, not even a
bucket ready, and the inhabitants stood idly by as spectators.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 33.</note>
Pliny was most assiduous in devising or promoting engineering
improvements for the health and convenience of the province,
and often called for expert assistance from Rome. Irregularities
in the working of the civic constitutions also gave him
much trouble. The <hi rend="italic">ecdicus</hi> or <hi rend="italic">defensor</hi> has demanded repayment
of a largess made to one Julius Piso from the treasury of
Amisus, which the decrees of Trajan now forbade.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 110; cf. Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> i. 522.</note> Just as
Pliny had suggested that members of a curia should be forced
to accept loans from the State, so we can see ominous signs of
a wish to compel men to accept the curial dignity beyond the
legal number, in order to secure the honorarium of from £35
to £70 on their admission.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 112, 114, 116.</note> The <hi rend="italic">Lex Pompeia</hi>, which forbade
a Bithynian municipality to admit to citizenship men from
other Bithynian states, had long been ignored, and in numbers
of cities there were many sitting in the senate in violation of
the law. The Pompeian law also required that a man should
be thirty years of age when he was elected to a magistracy or
took his place in the Curia, but a law of Augustus had reduced
the limit for the minor magistracies to twenty-two. Here was
a chance of adding to the strength of the Curia which was
seized by the municipal censors. And if a minor magistrate
might enter the Curia as a matter of course at twenty-two, why
not others equally fit?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 79.</note> In another typical case the legate
was disturbed by the lavish hospitality of leading citizens. On
the assumption of the toga, at a wedding, or an election to
civic office, or the dedication of a public work, not only the
whole of the Curia, but a large number of the common people,
were often invited to a banquet and received from their host
one or two denarii apiece.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 116.</note> Pliny was probably unnecessarily
alarmed. The inscriptions show us the same scenes all over
the Empire,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7001; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena
Trim. Einl.</hi> 53; corruption, however,
by means of hospitality is expressly
forbidden by the <hi rend="italic">Lex Urson.</hi> § 132;
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. <hi rend="italic">Suppl.</hi> p. 852.</note> and the emperor with calm dignity leaves the question
of such entertainments to the prudence of his lieutenant.
</p>

<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>

<p>
There are many religious questions submitted to the
emperor in these celebrated despatches, especially those relating
to the toleration of Christians.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ad Traj.</hi> 96.</note> But, however profoundly
interesting, they lie beyond the scope of this chapter. We are
occupied with the secular life of the provincial town. And the
Letters of Pliny place some things in a clear light. In the first
place, the state has begun in the reign of Trajan to control
the municipality, especially in the management of its finances;
but the control is rather invited than imposed. At any rate,
it has become necessary, owing to malversation or incompetence.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> 33;
Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Plut.</hi> pp. 246-7.</note>
Nothing could be more striking than the contrast between
the civic bungling exposed by Pliny, and the clear, patient
wisdom of the distant emperor. And in another point we
can see that the municipalities have entered on that disastrous
decline which was to end in the ruin of the fifth century.
Wasteful finance is already making its pressure felt on
the members of the Curia, and membership is beginning to
be thought a burden rather than an honour. From the reign
of Trajan we begin to hear of the <hi rend="italic">Curatores</hi>, who were
imperial officers, appointed at first to meet a special emergency,
but who became permanent magistrates, with immense powers,
especially over finance.<note place="foot">The different classes of Curatores,
which must be carefully distinguished,
are clearly given by Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Prov.
Admin.</hi> 236. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3899,
3902, 3989. For a good example of the
function of the Curator, cf. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 3787.</note> The free civic life of the first century
is being quietly drawn under the fatal spell of a bureaucratic
despotism.
</p>

<p>
The cities did much for themselves out of the public
revenues.<note place="foot">For the sources of these, cf. Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> ii. p. 96.</note> But there are many signs that private ambition
or munificence did even more. The stone records of
Pompeii confirm these indications in a remarkable way.
Pompeii, in spite of the prominence given to it by its tragic fate,
was only a third-rate town, with a population probably of not
more than 20,000.<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi> (Eng. Tr.), p. 16.</note> Its remains, indeed, leave the impression
that a considerable class were in easy circumstances; but it
may be doubted whether Pompeii could boast of any great
capitalists among its citizens. Its harbour, at the mouth of
the Sarno, was the outlet for the trade of Nola and Nuceria.
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>There were salt works in a suburb near the sea. The fish
sauces of Umbricius Scaurus had a great celebrity.<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi> (Eng. Tr.), p. 15.</note> The
vine and the olive were cultivated on the volcanic offshoot
from Vesuvius; but the wine of Pompeii was said by the elder
Pliny to leave a lingering headache. Mill-stones were made
from the lava of the volcano. The market gardeners drove a
flourishing trade, and the cabbage of Pompeii was celebrated.
On the high ground towards Vesuvius many wealthy Romans,
Cicero, and Drusus, the son of Claudius, built country seats, in
that delicious climate where the winters are so short, and the
summer heats are tempered by unfailing breezes from the
mountains or the western sea. All these things made Pompeii
a thriving and attractive place; yet its trade hardly offered
the chance of the huge fortunes which could be accumulated
in those days at Puteoli or Ostia.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 38.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, a large number of the public buildings of
Pompeii were the gift of private citizens. The Holconii were
a great family of the place in the reign of Augustus. M.
Holconius Rufus had been ordinary duumvir five times, and
twice quinquennial duumvir; he was priest of Augustus, and
finally was elected patron of the town.<note place="foot">Mau, p. 143.</note> Such dignities in
those days imposed a corresponding burden. And an inscription
tells that, on the rebuilding of the great theatre, probably
about 3 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, Holconius Rufus and Holconius Celer defrayed
the expense of the crypt, the tribunals, and the whole space for
the spectators. Women did not fall behind men in their
public benefactions. On the eastern side of the forum of
Pompeii there is a building and enclosure, with the remains of
porticoes, colonnades, and fountains, which are supposed to
have been a cloth market. In a niche stood a marble statue,
dedicated by the fullers of Pompeii to Eumachia, a priestess of
the city. And Eumachia herself has left a record that she
and her son had erected the building at their own expense.<note place="foot">Id. p. 111.</note>
The dedication probably belongs to the reign of Tiberius. The
visitor who leaves the forum by the arch, at the north-east
corner, and turns into the broadest thoroughfare of the town,
soon reaches the small temple of Fortuna Augusta, erected in
the reign of Augustus. Both the site and the building were
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>the gift of one M. Tullius, who had, like M. Holconius, borne all
the honours which the city could bestow.<note place="foot">Mau, p. 124.</note> The amphitheatre
in the south-east corner of the town, the scene of so many
gladiatorial combats recorded in the inscriptions, was erected
by two men of the highest official rank, C. Quinctius Valgus
and M. Porcius, probably the same men who bore at least part
of the cost of the smaller theatre of Pompeii.<note place="foot">Id. pp. 147, 206.</note> The last
instance of this generous public spirit which we shall mention
is of interest in many ways. It is well known that in the
year 63 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> an earthquake overthrew many buildings, and
wrought great havoc in Pompeii. Among other edifices, the
temple of Isis was thrown down. The temple, of which we
can now study the remains, had been built by a boy of six
years of age, Numerius Popidius Celsinus, who, in acknowledgment
of his own, or rather of his father’s liberality, was at that
unripe age co-opted a member of <q>the splendid order.</q><note place="foot">Id. p. 164.</note> This
mode of rewarding a father by advancing his infant son to
premature honours is not unknown in other inscriptions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7008, 7010.</note>
</p>

<p>
The literature of the age contains many records of profuse
private liberality of the same kind. The circle and family of
Pliny were, as we have seen in this, as in other respects, models
of the best sentiment of the time. Pliny was not a very rich
man, according to the standard of an age of colossal fortunes; yet
his benefactions, both to private friends and to the communities
in which he was interested, were on the scale of the largest
<anchor id="corr224"/><corr sic="wealth">wealth.</corr> It has been calculated that he must have altogether
given to his early home and fatherland, as he calls it, a sum
of more than £80,000; and the gifts were of a thoroughly
practical kind—a library, a school endowment, a foundation for
the nurture of poor children, a temple of Ceres, with spacious
colonnades to shelter the traders who came for the great fair.<note place="foot">Duruy, v. 396.</note>
A great lady, Ummidia Quadratilla, known to us not altogether
favourably in Pliny’s letters, built a temple and amphitheatre
for Casinum.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 781.</note> From the elder Pliny we learn that the distinguished
court physicians, the two Stertinii, whose professional
income is said to have ranged from £2000 to £5000 a
year, exhausted their ample fortune in their benefactions to
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>the city of Naples.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xxix. 5.</note> A private citizen bore the cost of an aqueduct
for Bordeaux, at an expenditure of £160,000.<note place="foot">Duruy, v. 396.</note> Another
benefactor, one Crinas, spent perhaps £80,000 on the walls of
Marseilles.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi></note> The grandfather of Dion Chrysostom devoted his
entire ancestral fortune to public objects.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 46 (519).</note> Dion, himself,
according to his means, followed the example of his ancestor.
The site alone of a colonnade, with shops and booths, which he
presented to Prusa, cost about £1800. When Cremona was
destroyed by the troops of Vespasian in <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 69, its temples and
forums were restored by the generous zeal of private citizens,
after all the horror and exhaustion of that awful conflict.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 34, reposita fora
templaque munificentia municipum.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the prince of public benefactors in the Antonine age
was the great sophist Herodes Atticus, the tutor of M. Aurelius,
who died in the same year as his pupil, 180 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> He acted up
to his theory of the uses of wealth on a scale of unexampled
munificence.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. 1; Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. p. 120.</note> His family was of high rank, and claimed descent
from the Aeacidae of Aegina. They had also apparently inexhaustible
resources. His father spent a sum of nearly
£40,000 in supplementing an imperial grant for the supply of
water to the Troad. The munificence of the son was extended
to cities in Italy, as well as to Corinth, Thessaly, Euboea,
Boeotia, Elis, and pre-eminently to Athens. He gave an
aqueduct to Canusium and Olympia, a racecourse to Delphi,
a roofed theatre to Corinth.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. 5.</note> He provided sulphur baths at
Thermopylae for the visitors from Thessaly and the shores of
the Maliac gulf. He aided in the restoration of Oricum in
Epirus, and liberally recruited the resources of many another
decaying town in Greece. He was certainly benevolent, but
he had also a passion for splendid fame, and cherished an
ambition to realise the dream of Nero, by cutting a canal
across the Corinthian Isthmus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 6.</note> But Attica, where he
was born, and where he had a princely house on the Ilissus,
was the supreme object of his bounty. In his will he left
each Athenian citizen an annual gift of a mina. He would
offer to the Virgin Goddess a sacrifice of a hundred oxen on a
single day; and, when the great festivals came round, he used to
<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>feast the people by their tribes, as well as the resident strangers,
on couches in the Ceramicus. He restored the ancient shrines
and stadia with costly marbles. And, in memory of Rhegilla,
his wife, he built at the foot of the acropolis a theatre for
6000 spectators, roofed in with cedar wood, which, to the eye
of Pausanias, surpassed all similar structures in its splendour.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
The liberality of Herodes Atticus, however astonishing it
may seem, was only exceptional in its scale. The same spirit
prevailed among the leading citizens or the great <hi rend="italic">patroni</hi> of
hundreds of communities, many of them only known to us
from a brief inscription or two; and we have great reason to
be grateful on this score to the imperial legislation of later
days, which did its best to preserve these stone records for the
eyes of posterity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C. Theod.</hi> ix. 17, 5; <hi rend="italic">Nov. Valent.</hi>
5.</note> But in forming an estimate of the splendid
public spirit evoked by municipal life, it is well to remind
ourselves that much has necessarily been lost in the wreck of
time, and also that what we have left represents the civic life
of a comparatively brief period. Yet the remains are so
numerous that it is almost impossible to give any adequate
idea of their profusion to those who are unacquainted with
the inscriptions. The objects of this liberality are as various
as the needs of the community—temples, theatres, bridges,
markets, a portico or a colonnade, the relaying of a road or
pavement from the forum to the port, the repair of an aqueduct,
above all the erection of new baths or the restoration
of old ones, with perhaps a permanent foundation to provide
for the free enjoyment of this greatest luxury of the south.
The boon was extended to all citizens of both sexes, and in
some cases, even to strangers and to slaves.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6993, 7013, 7190, 6622,
2287, 6985, 3325.</note> There is an
almost monotonous sameness in the stiff, conventional record
of this vast mass of lavish generosity. It all seems a spontaneous
growth of the social system. One monument is
erected by the senate and people of Tibur to a man who
had borne all its honours, and had left the town his sole
heir.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6994.</note> On another, an Augustal of Cales, who had received
the insignia of the duumvirate, tells posterity that he had
laid down a broad road through the town.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6983.</note> Another
    bene<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>factor bore the chief cost of a new meat market at Aesernia, the
authorities of the town supplying the pillars and the tiles.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7013.</note>
A priestess of Calama in Numidia expended a sum of £3400
on a new theatre.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 5366; she received the
honour of five statues in return.</note> Perhaps the commonest object of private
liberality was the erection or maintenance of public baths. An
old officer of the fourth legion provided free bathing at Suessa
Senonum for every one, even down to the slave girls.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2287.</note> At
Bononia, a sum of £4350 was bequeathed for the same liberal
purpose.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3325.</note> A magnate of Misenum bequeathed 400 loads of
hard wood annually for the furnaces of the baths, but with
the stipulation that his son should be made patron of the
town, and that his successors should receive all the magistracies.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3772.</note>
</p>

<p>
These are only a few specimens taken at random from the
countless records of similar liberality to the parent city. The
example of the emperors must have stimulated the creation
of splendid public works in the provinces. It has been
remarked by M. Boissier that the imperial government at
all times displayed the politic or instinctive love of monarchy
for splendour and magnificence.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 44.</note> The Roman Code, down to
the end of the Western Empire, gives evidence of a jealous
care for the preservation of the monuments and historic
buildings of the past, and denounces with very unconventional
energy the <q>foul and shameful</q> traffic in the relics of ancient
glory which prevailed in the last age of the Empire.<note place="foot">See <hi rend="italic">Rom. Soc. in the Last Century of
the Western Empire</hi> (1st ed.), p. 202.</note> After
great fires and desolating wars, the first thought of the most
frugal or the most lavish prince was to restore in greater
grandeur what had been destroyed. After the great conflagration
of <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 64, which laid in ashes ten out of the fourteen
regions of Rome, Nero immediately set to work to rebuild the
city in a more orderly fashion, with broader streets and open
spaces.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xvi.</note> Vespasian, on his accession, found the treasury
loaded with a debt of £320,000,000. Yet the frugal emperor
did not hesitate to begin at once the restoration of the Capitol,
and all the other ruins left by the great struggle of <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 69
from which his dynasty arose.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> ix.; D. Cass. lxvi. 10.</note> He even undertook some new
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>works on a great scale, the temple of Peace and the amphitheatre,
on the plans projected by Augustus. Titus completed
the Colosseum, and erected the famous baths.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tit.</hi> vii. nemine ante se
munificentia minor.</note> Domitian once
more restored the Capitol, and added many new buildings,
temples to his <q>divine</q> father and brother, with many shrines
of his special patroness Minerva; a stone stadium for 30,000
people, and an Odeum for an audience of 10,000.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Domit.</hi> v.</note> Trajan
was lauded by Pliny for his frugal administration of the
treasury, combined with magnificence in his public works.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 51.</note>
Nor was the encomium undeserved. He made docks and erected
warehouses at Ostia; he ran a new road through the Pomptine
marshes; he lavished money on aqueducts and baths.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxviii. 7, 15; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi>
29, 51.</note> His
most imposing construction was a new forum between the
Capitoline and the Quirinal, with stately memorials of the
achievements of his reign. But the prince of imperial builders
and engineers was Hadrian. Wherever he went he took with
him in his journeys a troop of architects to add something to
the splendour or convenience of the cities through which he
passed. <q>In almost every city,</q> says his biographer, <q>he
erected some building.</q><note place="foot">Ael. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 29.</note> But the capital was not neglected
by Hadrian. He restored historic structures such as the
Pantheon and the temple of Neptune, the forum of Augustus,
and Agrippa’s baths, with no ostentatious intrusion of his
own name.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 19, § 10, eaque omnia propriis
auctorum nominibus consecravit.</note> In his own name he built the temples of Venus
and Roma, the bridge across the Tiber, and that stately
mausoleum, which, as the castle of S. Angelo, links the
memory of the pagan Empire with the <anchor id="corr228"/><corr sic="mediæval">mediaeval</corr> Papacy and
the modern world. The example of the imperial masters of
the world undoubtedly reinforced the various impulses which
inspired the dedication of so much wealth to the public
service or enjoyment through all the cities of the Empire.
</p>

<p>
But the wealthy and public-spirited citizen was also
expected to cater for the immediate pleasure or amusement of
his neighbours in games and feasts. We have seen that Pliny,
during his administration of Bithynia, seems to have regarded
the public feasts given to a whole commune on occasions of
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>private rejoicing, as dangerous to the general tranquillity. Yet
the usage meets us everywhere in the inscriptions, and even in
the literary history of the time. This spacious hospitality was
long demanded from the rich and powerful, from the general
at his triumph, from the great noble on his birthday or his
daughter’s marriage, from the rich burgher at the dedication
of a temple or a forum which he had given to the city, from
the man who had been chosen patron of a town in expectation
of such largesses, not to speak of the many private patrons
whose morning receptions were thronged by a hungry crowd,
eager for an invitation to dinner, or its equivalent in the
sportula.<note place="foot">On the sportula at this time, cf.
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xvi., <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> vii.; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Pr.</hi>
<anchor id="corr229"/><corr sic="1">i.</corr>, 207 sq.; Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 109.</note> Julius Caesar on his triumph in 46 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> had
feasted the people at 22,000 tables.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Caes.</hi> 55,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἑστιάσας μὲν ἐν δισμυρίοις καὶ δισχιλίοις τρικλίνοις ὁμοῦ σύμπαντας</foreign>: D. Cass. 43, 21, 3.</note> Great houses, like the
sumptuous seat of Caninius Rufus at Como, had enormous
banquet halls for such popular repasts.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 3, triclinia illa popularia.</note> The Trimalchio of
Petronius desires himself to be sculptured on his tomb in
the character of such a lavish host.<note place="foot">Petron. 71.</note> There was in that age
no more popular and effective way of testifying gratitude for
the honours bestowed by the popular voice, or of winning
them, than by a great feast to the whole commune, generally
accompanied by a distribution of money, according to social
or official grade. It was also the most popular means of
prolonging one’s memory to bequeath a foundation for the
perpetual maintenance of such repasts in honour of the dead.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7115, 1368, 4088, 4115.</note>
One P. Lucilius of Ostia had held all the great offices of his town,
and had rewarded his admirers with a munificence apparently
more than equivalent to the official honours they had bestowed.
He had paved a long road from the forum to the arch, restored
a temple of Vulcan, of which he was the curator, and the
temples of Venus, Spes, and Fortuna; he had provided standard
weights for the meat market, and a tribunal of marble for the
forum. But probably his most popular benefaction was a
great banquet to the citizens, where 217 couches were arrayed
for them.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3882.</note> The same munificent person had twice entertained the
whole of the citizens at luncheon. Elsewhere a veteran, with
a long and varied service, had settled at Auximum where he
<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>had been elected patron of the community. His old comrades,
the centurions of the Second Legion (Traj. Fortis) erected a
monument to his virtues, and, at the dedication, he gave a
banquet to the townsfolk.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3868.</note> One other example, out of the
many which crowd the inscriptions, may serve to complete
the picture of civic hospitality. Lucius Cornelius of Surrentum
received on his death the honour of a public funeral by a
vote of the Curia. The inscription on his statue records that, on
assuming the garb of manhood, he had provided a meal of pastry
and mead for the populace; when he became aedile, he exhibited
a contest of gladiators; and, twice reaching the honours
of the duumvirate, he repaid the compliment by splendid
games and a stately banquet.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6211.</note>
</p>

<p>
At these entertainments a gift of money, always graduated
according to the social rank of the guests, decurio, augustal,
or plebeian, was generally added to the fare.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 210; Petron. 45;
<hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 842; Momms. <hi rend="italic">Colleg.</hi> p. 110.</note> Sometimes the
distribution took the form of a lottery. A high official of
Beneventum, who had probably inherited a fortune from his
father, a leading physician of the capital, once scattered
tickets among the crowd, which gave the finder the right to
a present of gold, silver, dress, or other smaller prizes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3394; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> 18.</note>
Women appeared sometimes both as hostesses and guests
on these occasions. Caesia Sabina of Veii, on the day on
which her husband was entertaining all the citizens, invited
the female relatives of the decurions to dinner, with the
additional luxury of a gratuitous bath.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3738.</note> It is curious to
observe that at the festivities in which women are entertained,
the sharp demarcation of ranks is maintained as strictly
as it is among their male relations. Thus, in a distribution
at Volceii, the decurions, augustales, and vicani, receive
respectively thirty, twenty, and twelve sesterces apiece; while
the proportion observed among the ladies of the three social
grades is sixteen, eight, and four. Nor were children, even
those of the slave class, forgotten on these festive occasions.
One kindly magnate of Ferentinum left a fund of about £750
to give an annual feast of pastry and mead upon his
birthday for all the inhabitants with their wives, and at the
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>same time, 300 pecks of nuts were provided for the children,
bond and free.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 5853; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.</hi> p. 55.</note>
</p>

<p>
These provincial societies, as we have already seen, were organised
on aristocratic or plutocratic principles. The distinction
between <hi rend="italic">honestior</hi> and <hi rend="italic">humilior</hi>, which becomes so cruel in the
Theodosian Code, was, even in the Antonine age, more sharply
drawn and more enduring than is agreeable to our modern
notions of social justice. The rich have a monopoly of all
official power and social precedence; they have even the
largest share in gifts and paltry distributions of money which
wealth might be expected to resign and to despise. Their sons
have secured to them by social convention, or by popular
gratitude and expectancy, a position equal to that of their
ancestors. The dim plebeian crowd, save for the right
of an annual vote at the elections, which was in a few
generations to be withdrawn, seem to be of little more
consequence than the slaves; they were of far less consequence
than those freedmen who had the luck or the
dexterity to build up a rapid fortune, and force their way
into the chasm between the privileged and the disinherited.
Yet this would hardly be a complete and penetrating view
of the inner working and the spirit of that municipal society.
The apparent rigidity and harshness of the lines of demarcation
were often relieved by a social sentiment which, on the
one hand, made heavy demands on rank and wealth, and on
the other, drew all classes together by the strong bond of
fellowship in a common social life. There has probably seldom
been a time when wealth was more generally regarded as a
trust, a possession in which the community at large has a
right to share. There never was an age in which the wealthy
more frankly, and even recklessly, recognised this imperious
claim. It would indeed be difficult to resolve into its
elements the complicated mass of motives which impelled
the rich burgher to undertake such enormous, and often
ruinous, expenditure for the common good or pleasure. There
was of course much of mere selfish ambition and love of
popularity. The passion for prominence was probably never
stronger. Direct or even veiled corruption of the electors was,
indeed, strictly prohibited by law.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Lex Urson.</hi> § 132.</note> But it was a recognised
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>principle of public life that the city should honour its benefactors,
and that those whom she had raised to her highest
distinctions should manifest their gratitude by some contribution
to the comfort or the enjoyments of the people. But,
when we have admitted all vulgar motives of munificence, a
man would show himself a very unobservant, or else a very
cynical student of the time, if he failed to recognise that,
among these countless benefactors, there were many animated,
not only by a sense of duty, but by a real ardour of public
spirit, men who wished to live in the love and memory of
their fellows, and who had a rare perception of the duties of
wealth. Philostratus has left us in his own words a record
of the principles which inspired Herodes Atticus in his almost
fabulous donations to many cities in Asia, Greece, and Italy.
Herodes used to say that the true use of money was to succour
the needs of others; riches which were guarded with a niggard
hand were only a <q>dead wealth</q>; the coffers in which they
were stowed away were merely a prison; and the worship of
money resembled the sacrifice which the fabled Aloidae offered
to a god after putting him in chains.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. 1.</note> The main characteristics
of human nature are singularly fixed from age to age,
although the objects of its love and devotion may endlessly
vary. The higher unselfish impulses must assert themselves
in any society which is not plunging into the abyss. The
choicer spirits will be always ready to lavish effort or material
wealth on objects which are sacred to their own age, although
they may seen chimerical or unworthy to the next. And we
may well believe that the man who in the second century
built a bath or a theatre for fellow townsmen, might possibly,
had he lived in the fifth, have dedicated a church to a patron
saint, or bequeathed his lands to a monastery.
</p>

<p>
The Antonine age was on one side perhaps rather coarse in
its ideals, passionately fond of splendour and brilliant display,
proud of civic dignity, and keenly alive to the ease and
comfort and brightness which common effort or individual
generosity might add to the enjoyment of life. It was also
an intensely sociable age. Men looked for their happiness to
their city rather than to the family or the state. If their city
could not play a great part as an independent commonwealth,
<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>it might, by the self-sacrifice of its sons, assert its dignity
among its rivals. It could make itself a society which men
would proudly or affectionately claim as their <q>patria</q> and
their parent, and on which they would vie with one another in
lavishing their time and their gold. And the buildings and
banquets and bright festivals, on which so much was lavished,
were enjoyed by all citizens alike, the lowest and the highest,
although high and low had sometimes by prescriptive usage an
unequal share in the largesses. The free enjoyment of sumptuous
baths, of good water from the Atlas, the Apennines, or the
Alban Hills, the right to sit at ease with one’s fellows when
the <hi rend="italic">Pseudolus</hi> or the <hi rend="italic">Adelphi</hi> was put upon the boards, the
pleasure of strolling in the shady colonnades of the forum or
the market, surrounded by brilliant marbles and frescoes, with
fountains shedding their coolness around; the good fellowship
which, for the time, levelled all ranks, in many a simple communal
feast, with a coin or two distributed at the end to recall
or heighten the pleasure—all these things tended to make the
city a true home, to some extent almost a great family circle.
There was much selfishness and grossness, no doubt, in all this
civic life. Which later age can cast the first stone? Yet
a study of the inscriptions of the Antonine age leaves the
impression that, amid all the sharply drawn distinctions of
rank, with all the petty ambition and self-assertion, or the
fawning and expectant servility, there was also a genuine
patriotic benevolence on the one hand, and a grateful recognition
of it on the other. The citizens record on many a tablet
their gratitude to patron or duumvir or augustal, or to some
simple old centurion, returned from far frontier camps, who
had paved their promenade, or restored their baths, or given
them a shrine of Neptune or Silvanus. They also preserved
the memory of many a kindly benefactor who left, as he fondly
thought for ever, the funds for an annual feast, with all the
graduated shares scrupulously prescribed, to save an obscure
tomb from the general oblivion. Thus, although that ancient
city life had its sordid side, which is laid bare with such
pitiless Rabelaisian realism by Petronius, it had its nobler
aspect also. Notwithstanding the aristocratic tone of municipal
society in the age of the Antonines, it is possible that the
separation of classes in our great centres of population is
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>morally more sharp and decided than it was in the days when
the gulf between social ranks was in theory impassable.
</p>

<p>
There is however another side to this picture of fraternal
civic life. If some of its pleasures were innocent and even
softening and elevating, there were others which pandered to
the most brutal and cruel passions. The love of amusement
grew upon the Roman character as civilisation developed in
organisation and splendour, and unfortunately the favourite
amusements were often obscene and cruel. The calendar of
the time is sufficiently ominous. The number of days which
were annually given up to games and spectacles at Rome rose
from 66 in the reign of Augustus, to 135 in the reign of
M. Aurelius, and to 175, or more, in the fourth century. In
this reckoning no account is taken of extraordinary festivals
on special occasions.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 142; cf. Jul.
Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. x.</note> The Flavian amphitheatre was inaugurated
by Titus with lavish exhibitions extending over 100
days.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tit.</hi> vii.</note> The Dacian triumphs of Trajan were celebrated by
similar rejoicings for 123 days, and 10,000 gladiators were
sent down into the arena.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 68. 15,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ θέας ἐν τρισὶ καὶ εἴκοσι καὶ ἑκατὸν ἡμέραις ἐποίησεν ...
    καὶ μονομάχοι μύριοι ἠγωνίσαντο</foreign>.</note> The rage of all classes of the
Roman populace for these sights of suffering and shame continued
unabated to the very end of the Western Empire. The
lubricity of pantomime and the slaughter of the arena were
never more fiercely and keenly enjoyed than when the Germans
were thundering at the gates of Trèves and Carthage.<note place="foot">Salv. <hi rend="italic">De Gub. Dei</hi>, vi. § 69.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is difficult for us now to understand this lust of cruelty
among a people otherwise highly civilised, a passion which was
felt not merely by the base rabble, but even by the cultivated
and humane.<note place="foot">Aug. <hi rend="italic">Conf.</hi> vi. 8; cf. Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 46.</note> There was undoubtedly at all times a coarse
insensibility to suffering in the Roman character. The institution
of slavery, which involves the denial of ordinary human
rights to masses of fellow-creatures, had its usual effect in rendering
men contemptuously callous to the fate of all who did not
belong to the privileged class. Even a man of high moral tone
like Tacitus, while he condemns Drusus for gloating over his
gladiatorial shows, has only a word of scorn for the victims
of the butchery.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 76, <hi rend="italic">vili</hi> sanguine nimis
gaudens.</note> And the appetite grew with what it fed on.
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>From father to son, for nearly seven centuries, the Roman
character became more and more indurated under the influence
of licensed cruelty. The spectacle was also surrounded
by the emperors, even the greatest and best, for politic reasons,
with ever growing splendour. The Flavian amphitheatre,
which remains as a monument of the glory of the Empire and
of its shame, must have been a powerful corruptor. There,
tier above tier, was gathered the concentrated excitability and
contagious enthusiasm of 87,000 spectators. The imperial
circle and the emperor himself, members of high senatorial
houses, the great officers of state, the priests, the vestal virgins,
gave an impressive national dignity to the inhuman spectacle.
And now and then an Eastern prince or ambassador, or the
chief of some half-savage tribe in Germany or Numidia,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxxv.</note> amused
the eyes of the rabble who swarmed on the upper benches.
Every device of luxurious art was employed to heighten the baser
attractions of the scene. The magnificent pile was brightened
with gems of artistic skill.<note place="foot">Calpurn. <hi rend="italic">Ecl.</hi> vii. 24 sqq.

<lg>
<l>Vidimus in caelum trabibus spectacula textis</l>
<l>Surgere, Tarpeium prope despectantia culmen—</l>
<l>... Sic undique fulgor</l>
<l>Percussit: stabam defixus et ore patenti,</l>
<l>Cunctaque mirabar, etc.</l>
</lg></note> The arena was tesselated with rich
colouring from the sunlight which streamed through the awnings.
The waters of perfumed fountains shot high into the air, spreading
their fragrant coolness; and music filled the pauses in the
ghastly conflict. From scenes like these was probably drawn
the picture in the Apocalypse: <hi rend="italic">Mulier circumdata purpura et
coccino—mater fornicationum—ebria de sanguine sanctorum.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In the first and second centuries the passion for cruel
excitement was as strong in the provincial towns as it was even
at Rome. This may have been partly due to the monotony of
provincial life. It was also stimulated by the ease with which
public sentiment extorted the means for these gratifications
from the richer citizens. The opinion of the powerful and
enlightened class, with rare exceptions, made no effort to purify
and humanise the grossness of the masses. Seneca and Demonax
indeed display a modern humanity in their view of the degrading
influence of these displays.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi> viii.; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 33;
Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reipubl. Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 29; Luc. <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi>
c. 57.</note> A humane magistrate of
Vienne, one Trebonius Rufinus, in the reign of Trajan, having
autocratically abolished them in his city, was called upon to
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>defend his conduct before the emperor, and Junius Mauricus had
the courage to express before the council a wish that they could
be abolished also at Rome.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iv. 22.</note> Augustus had, by an imperial edict,
restrained the cruel exhibitions of the father of Nero.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, iv.</note> Vespasian,
according to Dion Cassius,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 15; cf. M. Aur. vi. 46.</note> had little pleasure in the
shows of the arena. But the emperors generally, and not
least Vespasian’s sons, encouraged and pandered to the lust
for blood.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 68. 10 and 15, 66. 25;
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xi.; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> iv.</note> The imperial gladiators were organised elaborately
in four great schools by Domitian,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 67. 1; cf. Friedl. ii. 202.</note> with a regular administration,
presided over by officers of high rank. The gentle Pliny,
who had personally no liking for such spectacles, applauded
his friend Maximus for giving a gladiatorial show to the people
of Verona, to do honour to his dead wife, in the true spirit
of the old Bruti and Lepidi of the age of the Punic Wars.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 34; <hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 33.</note>
He found in the shows of Trajan a splendid incentive of contempt
for death.
</p>

<p>
It is little wonder that, with such examples and such
approval, the masses gloated unrestrained over these inhuman
sports. The rag-dealer at Trimalchio’s dinner is certainly
drawn to the life.<note place="foot">Petron. 45.</note> They are going to have a three days’
carnival of blood. There is to be no escape; the butcher is
to do his work thoroughly in full view of the crowded tiers
of the amphitheatre. It was in Etruria, and in Campania,
where Trimalchio had his home, that the gladiatorial combats
took their rise. Campanian hosts used to entertain their guests
at dinner with them in the days before the second Punic War.<note place="foot">Strabo, v. c. 4, 13.</note>
And it was in Campanian towns that in the first century was
displayed most glaringly the not unusual combination of
cruelty and voluptuousness. The remains of Pompeii furnish
us with the most vivid and authentic materials for a study of
the sporting tastes of a provincial town. It is significant
that the amphitheatre of Pompeii, which was capable of
holding 20,000 people, was built fifty years before the first
stone amphitheatre erected by Statilius Taurus at Rome.<note place="foot">Mau, 206, 207.</note> It
is also remarkable that, although Pompeii is mentioned only
twice by Tacitus, one of the references is to a bloody riot
<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>arising out of the games of the amphitheatre.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 17.</note> In the year
59 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> a Roman senator in disgrace, named Livineius Regulus,
gave a great gladiatorial show at Pompeii, which attracted
many spectators from the neighbouring town of Nuceria.
The scenes of the arena were soon reproduced in a fierce
street fight between the people of the two towns, in which
many Nucerians were left dead or wounded. The catastrophe
was brought before the emperor, and referred by him to the
Senate, with the result that Pompeii was sternly deprived of
its favourite amusement for a period of ten years. But when
the interdict was removed, the Pompeians had the enjoyment
of their accustomed pleasure for ten years more, till it was
finally interrupted by the ashes of Vesuvius.
</p>

<p>
A building at Pompeii, which was originally a colonnade
connected with the theatre,<note place="foot">Mau, 152.</note> had been converted into barracks
for a school of gladiators in the time of the early Empire.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 206.</note>
Behind the colonnade of more than seventy Doric columns
had been built a long row of small cells, with no opening
except on the central enclosure. There was a mess room,
and the <hi rend="italic">exedra</hi> on the southern side served as a retiring
room for the trainers and the men in the intervals of
exercise. The open area was used for practice. These
buildings have yielded many specimens of gladiators’ arms,
helmets, and greaves richly embossed in relief, scores of mail-coats,
shields, and horse-trappings. In one room there were
found the stocks, and four skeletons with irons on their legs.
In another, eighteen persons had taken refuge in the last
catastrophe, and, among them, a woman wearing costly jewels.
The walls and columns were covered with inscriptions and
rude sketches of gladiatorial life. Indeed the graffiti relating
to it are perhaps the most interesting in Pompeii. On some
of the tombs outside the city we can still read the notices
of coming games, painted on the walls by a professional
advertiser, one Aemilius Celer, <q>by the light of the moon.</q><note place="foot">Mau, 216, 217. The words in one
of these, flaminis Neronis Caesaris Aug.
fili, fix the date between 50 and 54 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi></note>
They announce that a duumvir or aedile or flamen will exhibit
twenty or thirty pairs of combatants on the calends of May
or the ides of April. There will also be a hunt, athletic
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>games, a distribution of gifts, and awnings will be provided.
Programmes were for sale in advance, with a list of the
events. The contents of one can still be read scratched on
a wall, with marginal notes of the results of the competition.
In one conflict, Pugnax, in the Thracian arms, had beaten
Murranus the Myrmillo, fighting in the arms of Gaul, with
the fish upon his helmet; and the fate of Murranus is
chronicled in one tragic letter p. (<hi rend="italic">periit</hi>). Two others fought
in chariots in old British fashion. And the Publius Ostorius
who won was, as his name may suggest, a freedman, now
fighting as a voluntary combatant, according to the inscription,
in his fifty-first conflict.<note place="foot">Mau, 217, 218.</note> The tomb of Umbricius Scaurus, on
the highway outside the Herculaneum gate, was adorned in
stucco relief with animated scenes from the arena of hunting
and battle. Hunters with sword and cloak, like a modern
toréador, are engaging lions or tigers. Two gladiators are
charging one another on horseback. Here, a vanquished
combatant, with upturned hand, is imploring the pity of
the spectators, while another is sinking in the agony of death
upon the sand. The name, the school, and the fighting
history of each combatant are painted beside the figure.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 411.</note>
The universal enthusiasm for the shows is expressed in many
a rude sketch which has been traced by boyish hands upon
the walls. The record of the heroes of the arena was evidently
then as familiar as that of a champion footballer or
cricketer is now to our own sporting youth. In the peristyle
of a house in Nola Street, the names of some thirty gladiators
can be read, with the character of their arms and the number
of their conflicts. Portraits of gladiators are figured on lamps
and rings and vases of the period. The charm of their manly
strength, according to Juvenal, was fatal to the peace of many
a Roman matron of the great world. And the humbler girls
of Pompeii have left the memorial of their weakness in more
than one frank outburst of rather unmaidenly admiration.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 220; Juv. vi. 82 sqq.; cf. Mart. v. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is a grave deduction from the admiring judgment of the
glory of the Antonine age, that its most splendid remains
are the stately buildings within whose enclosure, for centuries,
the populace were regaled with the sufferings and the blood of
<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>the noblest creatures of the wild animal world and of gallant
men. The deserts and forests of Africa and the remotest East
contributed their elephants and panthers and lions to these
scenes. And every province of the Empire sent its contingent
of recruits for the arena, Gaul, Germany, and Thrace, Britain
and Dacia, the villages of the Atlas, and the deserts of the
Soudan.<note place="foot">Friedl. ii. 189.</note> Just in proportion to the depth of the impress made by
Roman civilisation, was the amphitheatre more or less popular
in the provinces. In Italy itself the passion was naturally
strongest. Quiet little places, buried in the Apennines, or in
the mountains of Samnium, had their regular spectacles, and
record their gratitude for the pleasure to some magistrate or
patron.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 92.</note> The little town of Fidenae, in the reign of Tiberius,
gained for a moment a sinister fame by the collapse of its amphitheatre,
involving the death or mutilation of 50,000 spectators.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 62.</note>
An augustal of Praeneste endowed his town with a school of
gladiators, and received a statue for this contribution to the
pleasures of the populace.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2532.</note> A. Clodius Flaccus of Pompeii, in
his first duumvirate, on the Apollinaria, gave an exhibition in the
forum of bull-fighting, pugilism, and pantomime. He signalised
his second tenure of the office by a show of thirty-five pairs
of gladiators, with a hunting scene of bulls, boars, and bears.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2530.</note>
At Minturnae, a monument reminds <q>the excellent citizens</q>
that, in a show lasting for four days, eleven of the foremost of
Campanian gladiators had died before their eyes, along with
ten ferocious bears.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6148; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 1074, 6012.
This was given <hi rend="italic">postulante populo</hi>.</note> At Compsa in Samnium, a place hardly
ever heard of, the common people erected a statue to a priest
of Magna Mater, who had given them a splendid show, and he
in turn rewarded their gratitude by a feast to both sexes,
which lasted over two days.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5963, 5972, 2531; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
x. 228.</note> Similar records of misplaced
munificence might be produced from Bovianum and Beneventum,
from Tibur and Perusia, and many another obscure Italian
town. But the brutal insensibility of the age is perhaps nowhere
so glaringly paraded as in the days following the short-lived
victory of the Vitellian arms at Bedriacum. There, on
that ghastly plain, on which his rival had been crushed and
had closed a tainted life by a not inglorious death, Vitellius
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>gloated over the wreck of the great struggle. The trees were cut
down, the crops trampled into mire; the soil was soaked and
festering with blood, while mangled forms of men and horses
still lay rotting till the vultures should complete their obsequies.
Within forty days of the battle, the emperor attended great
gladiatorial combats given by his generals at Cremona and
Bononia, as if to revive the memory of the carnage by a
cruel mimicry.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 70-72.</note> The grim literary avenger of that carnival of
blood has pictured the imperial monster’s end, within a short
space, in colours that will never fade, deserted by his meanest
servants, shuddering at the ghastly terrors of the vast, silent
solitudes of the palace, dragged forth from his hiding, and flung
with insults and execrations down the Gemonian Stairs. The
dying gladiator of Cremona was more than avenged.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 84.</note>
</p>

<p>
The western provinces bordering on the Mediterranean, Gaul,
Spain, and Africa, drank deepest of the spirit which created the
great amphitheatres of Arles, Trèves, and Carthage, Placentia and
Verona, of Puteoli, Pompeii, and Capua. But the East caught
the infection, and gladiatorial combats were held at Antioch in
Pisidia, at Nysa in Caria, and at Laodicea; Alexandria had its
amphitheatre from the days of Augustus, and a school of
gladiators, presided over by a high imperial officer.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3725, 6156; Strab.
xvii. 1, 10; Friedl. ii. 204, 378 sqq.</note> The
Teutonic regions of the north and Greece were almost the only
provinces in which the bloody games were not popular. The
one Greek town where the taste for them was fully developed
was the mongrel city of Corinth, which was a Roman colony.
In the novel of Apuleius we meet a high Corinthian magistrate
travelling through Thessaly to collect the most famous gladiators
for his shows.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> x. 18; cf. iv. 13.</note> Yet even in Greece, even at Athens, which had
been the home of kindly pity from the days of Theseus, the cruel
passion was spreading in the days of the Antonines. Plutarch
urges public men to banish or to restrain these exhibitions in their
cities.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reipubl. Ger. Pr.</hi> 30; Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 21.</note> When the Athenians, from an ambition to rival the
splendour of Corinth, were meditating the establishment of a
gladiatorial show, the gentle Demonax bade them first to overturn
their altar of Pity.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> 57; cf. Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">Greek
World under Roman Sway</hi>, p. 271.</note> The apostles of Hellenism, Dion, Plutarch,
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>and Lucian, were unanimous in condemning an institution
which sacrificed the bravest men to the brutal passions of
the mob.
</p>

<p>
The games of the arena were sometimes held at the expense
of the municipality on great festivals, with a public officer,
bearing the title of <hi rend="italic">curator</hi>,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2373, 7037, 148, 2532.</note> to direct them. But, perhaps more
frequently, they were given by great magistrates or priests at
their own expense; or some rich <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi>, like the cobbler of
Bologna or the fuller of Modena, who have been ridiculed by
Martial, would try by such a display to force an entrance into
the guarded enclosure of Roman rank.<note place="foot">Mart. iii. 59, 16.</note> There were also frequent
bequests to create a permanent agonistic foundation.
The most striking example of such a legacy is to be found on
an inscription in honour of a munificent duumvir of Pisaurum.
He left a capital sum of more than £10,000 to the community.
The interest on two-fifths of this bequest, perhaps amounting
to £500, was to be spent in giving a general feast on the
birthday of the founder’s son. The accumulated interest of the
remaining three-fifths, amounting, perhaps, to £4000, was to
be devoted to a quinquennial exhibition of gladiators.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 81.</note> An
aedile in Petronius is going to spend between £3000 and
£4000 on a three days’ show.<note place="foot">Petron. 45.</note> The cost of these exhibitions,
however, must have widely varied. We hear of one in the
second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> which cost over £7000.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 137, Doch
diese Summe erscheint gering im Vergleich
mit der kolossalen Verschwendung,
mit der die Schauspiele in der
letzten Zeit der Republik gegeben
wurden; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 6278 (<hi rend="italic">Suppl.</hi> p.
1032).</note> The number of
pairs engaged appears from the inscriptions to have ranged
from five to thirty. The shows lasted from one to as many
as eight days.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2530; 2533; Friedl.
<hi rend="italic">Cena Trim.</hi> p. 58; Cic. <hi rend="italic">Ad Att.</hi> 12, 2.</note> And the quality of the combatants was
also very various. Tiberius once recalled some finished veterans
from their retirement at a fee of about £800 each.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> vii.</note> On the
other hand, a grumbler at Trimalchio’s dinner sneers at a stingy
aedile, whose gladiators were <q>two-penny men,</q> whom you
might knock over with a breath.<note place="foot">Petron. 45.</note> Besides the great imperial
schools at Praeneste, Capua, or Alexandria, and the <q>families</q>
maintained at all times by some of the great nobles, there
<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>were vagrant troops, kept up by speculative trainers for hire,
such as that gang into which Vitellius sold his troublesome
minion Asiaticus.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 202; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> xii. circumforaneo lanistae
vendidit.</note>
</p>

<p>
The profession of gladiator was long regarded as a tainted
one, on which social sentiment and law alike placed their
ban. It was a calling which included the vilest or the most
unfortunate of mankind. Slaves, captives in war, or criminals
condemned for serious offences, recruited its ranks.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 192.</note> The death
in the arena was thus often, really, a deferred punishment for
crime. But even from the later days of the Republic, men of
free birth were sometimes attracted by the false glory or the
solid rewards of the profession. Freedmen sometimes fought
at the call of their patrons.<note place="foot">Petron. 45; D. Cass. 60. 30.</note> And, when Septimius Severus
began to recruit the Pretorian guard from the provinces, the
youth of Italy, who had long enjoyed the monopoly of that
pampered corps, satisfied their combative or predatory instincts
by joining the ranks either of the gladiators or of the brigands.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 74. 2.</note>
The gladiator had, indeed, to submit to fearful perils and a
cruel discipline. His oath bound him to endure unflinchingly
scourging, burning, or death.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 196.</note> His barracks were a closely
guarded prison, and, although his fare was necessarily good,
his training was entirely directed to the production of a fine
fighting animal, who would give good sport in the arena. Yet
the profession must have had some powerful attractions.
Some of the emperors,<note place="foot">D. Cass. 66. 15; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 14;
cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxxiv.</note> Titus and Hadrian, themselves took a
pleasure in the gladiatorial exercises. Commodus, as if to
confirm the scandal about his parentage, actually descended
into the arena,<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Com.</hi> xi.; cf. viii.;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 150.</note> and imperial example was followed by men of
high rank, and even, according to the satirist, by matronly
viragoes.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> xxxix.; Juv. vi.
252.</note> The splendour of the arms, the ostentatious pomp
of the scene of combat, the applause of thousands of spectators
on the crowded benches, the fascination of danger, all this
invested the cruel craft with a false glory.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 198.</note> The mob of
all ages are ready to make a hero of the man who can
perform rare feats of physical strength or agility. And the
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>skilful gladiator evidently became a hero under the early
Empire, like his colleague of the red or green. His professional
record was of public interest; the number of his
combats and his victories was inscribed upon his tomb.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2571, 2572; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x.
7364; xii. 5836.</note> His
name and his features were scratched by boys on the street
walls. He attracted the unconcealed, and not always discreet,
admiration of women,<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>, p. 219 sq.</note> and his praise was sung in classic verse,
as his pathetic dignity in death has been immortalised in
marble. The memories of a nobler life of freedom sometimes
drove the slave of the arena to suicide or mutiny.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 70, § 20; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv.
46. Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> ii. 46; cf. Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi>
ii. 211.</note> But he was
oftener proud of his skill and courage, and eager to display
them. When shows were rare in the reign of Tiberius, a
Myrmillo was heard to lament that the years of his glorious
prime were running to waste.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> iv.</note> Epictetus says that the imperial
gladiators were often heard praying for the hour of conflict.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> i. 29, § 37.</note>
</p>

<p>
Great imperial schools were organised on the strictest
military principles, and were under the command of a
procurator who had often held high office in the provinces
or the army.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> ii. 204.</note> Each school had attached to it a staff of
masseurs, surgeon-dressers, and physicians to attend to
the general health of the members. There were various
grades according to skill or length of service, and a man
might rise in the end to be trainer of a troop. Gladiators,
like all other callings in the second century, had their colleges.
We have the roll of one of these, in the year 177 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>,
a college of Silvanus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2566.</note> The members are divided into three
decuries, evidently according to professional rank, and their
names and arms are also given. Their comrades often erected
monuments to them with a list of their achievements. Thus
a dear companion-in-arms commemorates a young Secutor at
Panormus, who died in his thirtieth year, who had fought in
thirty-four combats, and in twenty-one came off victorious.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2571.</note>
</p>

<p>
Our authorities do not often permit us to follow the
gladiator into retirement. The stern discipline of the <hi rend="italic">Ludus</hi>
no doubt made better men even of those condemned to it for
grievous crimes. The inscriptions contain a few brief records
<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>of their family life, which seems to have been as natural and
affectionate as that of any other class; wives and daughters
lamenting good husbands and fathers in the usual phrases,
and fathers in turn mourning innocent young lives, cut short
by the cruelty of the gods.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2572-9; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3329.</note> Sometimes the veteran gladiator
might be tempted to return to the old scenes for a high fee,
or he might become a trainer in one of the schools.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2573-5; D. Cass. 72. 22.</note> His son
might rise even to knightly rank;<note place="foot">Juv. iii. 158.</note> but the career of ambition
was closed to himself by the taint of a profession which the
people found indispensable to their pleasures, and which they
loaded with contempt.
</p>

<p>
The inscriptions pay all honour to the voluntary, single-minded
generosity with which men bore costly charges, and
gave time and effort to the business of the city. But there
was a tendency to treat public benefactions as the acknowledgment
of a debt, a return for civic honours. We can sometimes
even see that the gift was extorted by the urgency of the
people, in some cases even by menaces and force.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 1074.</note> The cities
took advantage of the general passion for place and social
precedence, and, often from sordid motives, crowded their
curial lists with <hi rend="italic">patroni</hi> and persons decorated with other
honorary distinctions. On the famous roll of the council of
Canusium, out of a total of 164 members, there are 39
<hi rend="italic">patroni</hi> of senatorial or knightly rank, and 25 <hi rend="italic">praetextati</hi>,
mere boys, who were almost certainly of the same aristocratic
class, and were probably destined to be future patrons of
the town.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3721.</note> In the desire to secure the support of wealth and
social prestige, the municipal law as to the age for magisterial
office was frequently disregarded, and even mere infants were
sometimes raised to the highest civic honours.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7008, 7010; cf. 7082, where a
youth of twenty had been iivir quinquennalis,
and had given a gladiatorial
show. Cf. 3714, quaestor designatus
est annorum xxiiii., 3745, 3246, 3768.</note> The position
of patron seems to have been greatly prized, as it was heavily
paid for. A great man with a liberal soul might be patron of
several towns,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3764.</note> and sometimes women of rank had the honour
conferred on them.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3773, 4036, 82, 5134; cf. 3744.</note> The <hi rend="italic">ornamenta</hi> or external badges of
official rank were frequently bestowed on people who were not
eligible by law for the magistracy. A resident alien (<hi rend="italic">incola</hi>),
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>or an augustal, might be co-opted into the <q>splendid order</q>
of the Curia, or he might be allowed to wear its badges, or
those of some office which he could not actually hold.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3709, 3750; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii.
3203, 3219.</note> But it
is plain that such distinctions had to be purchased or repaid.
The city seldom made any other return for generous devotion,
unless it were the space for a grave or the pageant of a public
funeral. It is true that a generous benefactor or magistrate is
frequently honoured with a statue and memorial tablet. Indeed,
the honour is so frequently bestowed that it seems to dwindle
to an infinitesimal value.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reipubl. Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 27.</note> And it is to our eyes still further
reduced by the agreeable convention which seems to have
made it a matter of good taste that the person so distinguished
by his fellow-citizens should bear the expense of the record
himself!<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6992.</note> Nor did the expectations of the grateful public end
even there; for, at the dedication of the monument, it was
seemingly imperative to give a feast to the generous community
which allowed or required its benefactor to bear the
cost of the memorial of his own munificence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3811, 3722, 6999, 7007, 7004
(honore usus inpensam remisit), 7011,
7190, 4100.</note> It is only fair,
however, to say that this civic meanness was not universal,
and that there are records to show that even the poorest
class sometimes subscribed among themselves to pay for the
honour which they proposed to confer.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3865, ex aere collato; 6996.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Antonine age was an age of splendid public spirit and
great material achievement. But truth compels us to recognise
that even in the age of the Antonines, there were ominous signs
of moral and administrative decay. Municipal benefactors
were rewarded with local fame and lavish flattery; but the
demands of the populace, together with the force of example
and emulation, contributed to make the load which the rich
had to bear more and more heavy. Many must have ruined
themselves in their effort to hold their place, and to satisfy an
exacting public sentiment. Men actually went into debt to
do so;<note place="foot">This seems clear from Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reip.
Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 31,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ μὴ δανειζόμενον οἰκτρὸν ἅμα καὶ καταγέλαστον εἶναι περὶ τὰς λειτουργίας</foreign>.</note> and as municipal life became less attractive or more
burdensome, the career of imperial office opened out and
offered far higher distinction. The reorganisation of the
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>imperial service by Hadrian had immense effects in diverting
ambition from old channels. It created a great hierarchy of
office, which absorbed the best ability from the provinces.
Provincials of means and position were constantly visiting the
capital for purposes of private business or pleasure, or to
represent their city as envoys to the emperor. They often
made powerful friends during their stay, and their sons, if not
they themselves, were easily tempted to abandon a municipal
career for the prospect of a high place in the imperial army
or the civil service.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reip. Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 18; cf. c. 10.</note> It is true that the local tie often remained
unbroken. The country town, of course, was proud
of the distinction to which its sons rose in the great world;
and many a one who had gained a knighthood or some military
rank, returned to his birthplace in later years, and was
enrolled among its patrons. We may be sure that many a
successful man, like the Stertinii of Naples, paid <q>nurture
fees</q> in the most generous way. But already in the reign of
Domitian, as we have seen, legal provision had to be made for
the contingency of an insufficient number of candidates for the
municipal magistracies. Already, in the reign of Trajan, the
cities of Bithynia are compelling men to become members
of the Curia, and lowering the age of admission to official
rank.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 113; 79.</note> Plutarch laments that many provincials are turning
their backs on their native cities and suing for lucrative
offices at the doors of great Roman patrons.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reip. Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 18.</note> Apollonius of
Tyana was indignant to find citizens of Ionia, at one of their
great festivals, masquerading in Roman names.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. T.</hi> iv. 5.</note> The illustrious
son of Chaeronea, with a wistful backward glance
at the freedom and the glories of the Periclean age, frankly
recognises that, under the shadow of the Roman power, the
civic horizon has drawn in.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reip. Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 32; cf.
Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Morale de Plut.</hi> p. 230.</note> It is a very different thing to
hold even the highest magistracy at Thebes or Athens from
what it was in the great days of Salamis or Leuctra. But
Plutarch accepts the Empire as inevitable. He appreciates
its blessings as much as Aristides or Dion Chrysostom. He
has none of the revolutionary rage which led Apollonius to
cast reproaches at Vespasian, or to boast of his complicity
<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>in the overthrow of Nero.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. T.</hi> v. 41, 10; cf.
Gréard, p. 227.</note> He has little sympathy with
philosophers like Epictetus, who would sink the interests of
everyday politics in the larger life of the universal commonwealth
of humanity. The Empire has extinguished much
of civic glory and freedom, but let us recognise its compensating
blessings of an ordered peace. <hi rend="italic">Spartam nactus es, hanc
exorna</hi>, might be the motto of Plutarch’s political counsels. He
himself, with a range of gifts and culture, which has made his
name immortal, did not disdain to hold a humble office in the
poor little place which was his home. And he appeals to the
example of Epameinondas, who gave dignity to the magistracy
which was concerned with the duty of the cleansing of the
sewers and streets of Thebes.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Reip. Ger. Pr.</hi> c. 15.</note> He tells his young pupil that,
although we have now no wars to wage, no alliances to conclude,
we may wage war on some evil custom, revive some
charitable institution, repair an aqueduct, or preside at a sacrifice.
Yet Plutarch has a keen insight into the municipal
vices of his age, the passion for place and office, the hot
unscrupulous rivalry which will stoop to any demagogic arts,
the venality of the crowd, and the readiness of the rich to
pamper them with largesses and shows, the insane passion for
pompous decrees of thanks and memorial statues; above all,
the eager servility which abandoned even the poor remnant of
municipal liberty, and was always inviting the interference of
the prince on the most trivial occasions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 27, 29, 30, 20.</note> Such appeals paralyse
civic energy and hasten the inevitable drift of despotism. He
exhorts men to strive by every means to raise the tone of
their own community, instead of forsaking it in fastidious
scorn, or ambition for a more spacious and splendid life.
</p>

<p>
The growing distaste for municipal honours was to some
extent caused by bureaucratic encroachments on the independence
of the Curia. As early as the reign of Trajan there are
unmistakable signs, as we have seen, of financial mismanagement
and decay. The case of Bithynia, in Trajan’s reign, is
sometimes treated as an exceptional one. It may be doubted
whether it is not a conspicuous example of general disorganisation.
The Bithynian towns were probably not alone
in their ill-considered expenditure on faultily planned aqueducts
<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>and theatres. Apamea was certainly not the only city
which called for an imperial auditor of its accounts. Inscriptions
of the reign of Trajan show that many towns in
Italy, Como, Canusium, Praeneste, Pisa, Bergamum, and
Caere, had curators of their administration appointed, some as
early as the reigns of Hadrian or Trajan.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4007 (Canusium), 2391
(Praeneste), 4491 (Pisa), 3898 (Bergamum),
3787 (Caere). For places
out of Italy, cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3212 (datus
a Trajano); viii. 2403, 2660 (Timgad
and Lambesi); iii. 3485 (Aquincum);
ii. 484 (Emerita); 4112 (Tarraco); cf.
x.; ii. p. 1158; Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. 11.</note> These officers,
who were always unconnected with the municipality, took
over the financial control, which had previously belonged to
the duumvirs and quaestors. They were often senators or
equites of high rank, and a single curator sometimes had the
supervision of several municipalities. The case of Caere is
peculiarly instructive and interesting.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3787, placuit tibi scribi
an in hoc quoque et tu consensurus
esses.</note> There, an imperial freedman,
named Vesbinus, proposed to erect at his own cost
a club-house (<hi rend="italic">phretrium</hi>), for the augustales, and asked the
municipal authorities for a site close to the basilica. At a
formal meeting of the Curia, the ground was granted to him,
subject to the approval of Curiatius Cosanus, the curator,
with a vote of thanks for his liberality. A letter to that
official was drawn up, stating the whole case, and asking for
his sanction. The curator, writing from Ameria, granted it in
the most cordial terms. It is noteworthy that at the very time
when Caere was consulting its curator about the proposal of
Vesbinus,<note place="foot"><hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 113, as the names of the
consuls show.</note> the Bithynian cities were laying bare their
financial and engineering difficulties to Pliny and Trajan. The
glory of free civic life is already on the wane. The municipality
has invited or submitted to imperial control. The burdens of
office have begun to outweigh its glory and distinction. In a
generation or two the people will have lost their elective power,
and the Curia will appoint the municipal officers from its own
ranks. It will end by becoming a mere administrative machine
for levying the imperial taxes; men will fly from its crushing
obligations to any refuge; and the flight of the curiales will
be as momentous as the coming of the Goths.<note place="foot">See <hi rend="italic">Roman Society in the Last
Century of the Western Empire</hi>, p. 208
sqq. (1st ed.).</note>
</p>

<p>
The judgment on that externally splendid city life of the
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>Antonine age will be determined by the ideals of the inquirer.
There was a genuine love of the common home, a general pride
in its splendour and distinction. And the duty, firmly
imposed by public sentiment on the well-endowed to contribute
out of their abundance to its material comfort and its glory,
was freely accepted and lavishly performed. Nor was this
expenditure all devoted to mere selfish gratification. The
helplessness of orphanhood and age, the penury and monotonous
dulness of the lives of great sunken classes, the education of
the young, were drawing forth the pity of the charitable. Munificence
was often indeed, in obedience to the sentiment of the
time, wasted on objects which were unworthy, or even to our
minds base and corrupting. Men seemed to think too much of
feasting and the cruel amusement of an hour. Yet when a whole
commune was regaled at the dedication of a bath or a temple,
there was a healthy social sympathy diffused for the moment
through all ranks, which softened the hard lines by which that
ancient society was parted.
</p>

<p>
Yet, in looking back, we cannot help feeling that over
all this scene of kindliness and generosity and social good-will,
there broods a shadow. It is not merely the doom of free
civic life, which is so clearly written on the walls of every curial
hall of assembly from the days of Trajan, to be fulfilled
in the long-drawn tragedy of the fourth and fifth centuries;
three hundred years have still to run before the inevitable
catastrophe. It is rather the feeling which seems to lurk
under many a sentence, half pitiful, half contemptuous, of
M. Aurelius, penned, perhaps, as he looked down on some
gorgeous show in the amphitheatre, when the Numidian
lion was laid low by a deft stroke of the hunting-spear, or
a gallant Myrmillo from the Thames or the Danube sank
upon the sand in his last conflict.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vi. 46; vii. 3; ix. 30.</note> It is the feeling of
Dion, when he watched the Alexandrians palpitating with
excitement over a race in the circus, or the cities of Bithynia
convulsed by some question of shadowy precedence or the
claim to a line of sandhills. It is the swiftly stealing shadow
of that mysterious eclipse which was to rest on intellect and
literature till the end of the Western Empire. It is the
burden of all religious philosophy from Seneca to Epictetus,
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>which was one long warning against the perils of a materialised
civilisation. The warning of the pagan preacher was
little heeded; the lesson was not learnt in time. Is it
possible that a loftier spiritual force may find itself equally
helpless to arrest a strangely similar decline?
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. The colleges and plebeian life"/><index index="pdf" level1="III. The colleges and plebeian life"/>
<head>CHAPTER III</head>

<head type="sub">THE COLLEGES AND PLEBEIAN LIFE</head>

<p>
The <hi rend="italic">Populus</hi> or <hi rend="italic">Plebs</hi> of a municipal town of the early Empire
is often mentioned in the inscriptions along with the <hi rend="italic">Ordo</hi>
and the Augustales, generally in demanding some benefaction,
or in doing honour to some benevolent patron.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz. Ind.</hi> 151; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. p.
940; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3763, 7170 (consensus
plebis); <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3185 (ex postulatione
populi); x. 5067, 1030, 8215, 3704.</note> They also
appear as recipients of a smaller share at public feasts and
distributions. They occasionally engage in a fierce conflict
with the higher orders, as at Puteoli in the reign of Nero,
when the discord was so menacing as to call for the presence
of a praetorian cohort.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 48; Hi (<hi rend="italic">i.e.</hi> plebs)
magistratuum et primi cujusque avaritiam
increpantes.</note> The election placards of Pompeii also
disclose a keen popular interest in the municipal elections.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iv. 202, 710, 787.</note>
But the common people are now as a rule chiefly known to us
from the inscriptions on their tombs. Fortunately there is an
immense profusion, in all the provinces as well as in Italy, of
these brief memorials of obscure lives. And although Roman
literature, which was the product of the aristocratic class or
of their dependents, generally pays but little attention to the
despised mass engaged in menial services or petty trades, we
have seen that the novel of Petronius flashes a brilliant light
upon it in the reign of Nero.
</p>

<p>
The immense development of the free proletariat, in the
time of the early Empire, is one of the most striking social
phenomena which the study of the inscriptions has brought to
light. It has sometimes been the custom to speak of that
society as depending for the supply of its wants entirely on slave
labour. And undoubtedly at one time slave labour occupied
the largest part of the field of industry. A household in the
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>time of the Republic, of even moderate wealth, might have
400 slaves, while a Crassus would have as many as 20,000,
whom he hired out in various industries.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 159, 160; Duruy,
<hi rend="italic">Hist. des Rom.</hi> v. 631; Athen. vi. 272 <hi rend="small">D.</hi></note> But several causes
conspired gradually to work a great industrial revolution.
From the days of Augustus, the wars beyond the frontier,
which added fresh territory and yielded crowds of captives to
the slave-markets, had become less frequent. And it is probable
that births among the slave class hardly sufficed to
maintain its numbers against the depletion caused by mortality
and manumission. The practice of emancipating slaves of
the more intelligent class went on so rapidly that it had even
to be restrained by law.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> 40; D. Cass. 55. 13.</note> Masters found it economically
profitable to give skilful slaves an interest in the profits of
their industry, and the <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi>, which was thus accumulated,
soon provided the means of purchasing emancipation. At
the same time, the dispersion of colossal fortunes, gained in the
age of rapine and conquest, and squandered in luxury and
excess, together with the exploitation of the resources of
favoured regions, which were now enjoying the blessings of
unimpeded commerce, rapid intercommunication, and perfect
security, must have given an immense stimulus to free
industry. A very casual glance at the inscriptions, under
the heading <hi rend="italic">Artes et Opificia</hi>,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> iii. <hi rend="italic">Ind.</hi> p. 180.</note> will show the enormous
and flourishing development of skilled handicrafts, with
all the minutest specialisation of the arts that wait on a
highly-organised and luxurious society. The epitaphs of these
obscure toilers have been brought to light in every part of
the Roman world, in remote towns in Spain, Gaul, Noricum,
Dacia, and North Africa, as well as in the ancient centres of
refinement in Italy or the Greek East. On a single page or
two you can read the simple record of the bridle-maker or
flask-maker of Narbonne, the cabriolet-driver of Senegallia, the
cooper of Trèves, the stone-cutter of Nîmes, the purple-dealer
of Augsburg, beside those of the wool-comber of Brescia, the
oculist of Bologna, the plumber of Naples, or the vendors of
unguents in the Via Sacra, and the humble fruiterer of the
Circus Maximus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4148, 4143, 4268, 4154.
For the provinces of <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. Suppl.
p. 1171; viii. p. 1102; x. 1163; xii.
p. 943.</note> Many of these people had risen from
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>slavery into the freedman class. Most of them are evidently
humble folk, although, like a certain female pearl-dealer of the
Via Sacra, they may have freedmen and freedwomen of their
own, for whom they provide a last resting-place beside themselves.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>, 4148, Marcia margaritaria
de Via Sacra legavit ... libertis
libertabusque suis....</note>
The barber, or auctioneer, or leather-seller, who had
become the owner of lands and houses, and who could even
give gladiatorial shows, excited the contempt of Juvenal and
Martial.<note place="foot">Juv. i. 24; x. 224; Mart. iii. 16, 59.</note> But these insignificant people, although despised by
the old world of aristocratic tradition, were proud of their crafts.
They tell posterity who and what they were, without any vulgar
concealment; nay, they have left expensive tombs, with the
emblems or instruments of their petty trades proudly blazoned
upon them like the armorial devices of our families of gentle
birth. In the museum of S. Germain may be seen the effigy
of the apple-seller commending his fruit to the attention of the
ladies of the quarter; the cooper, with a cask upon his shoulder;
the smith, hammer in hand, at the forge; the fuller, treading
out and dressing the cloth.<note place="foot">Duruy, v. 637.</note> This pride in honest industry is
a new and healthy sign, as a reaction from the contempt for it
which was engrained in old Roman society, and which is always
congenial to an aristocratic caste supported by slave labour.
In spite of the grossness and base vulgarity of sudden wealth,
portrayed by Petronius and Juvenal, the new class of free
artisans and traders had often, so far as we can judge by stone
records, a sound and healthy life, sobered and dignified by
honest toil, and the pride of skill and independence. Individually
weak and despised, they were finding the means of
developing an organisation, which at once cultivated social
feeling, heightened their self-respect, and guarded their collective
interests. While the old aristocracy were being rapidly
thinned by vice and extravagance, or by confiscation, the leaders
of the new industrial movement probably founded many a
senatorial house, which, in the fourth and fifth centuries, in an
ever-recurring fashion, came to regard manual industry with
sublime contempt, and traced themselves to Aemilius Paullus
or Scipio, or even to Aeneas or Agamemnon.<note place="foot">S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
The organisation of industry through the colleges attained
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>an immense development in the Antonine age, and still more
in the third century, after the definite sanction and encouragement
given to these societies by Alexander Severus. The
records of the movement are numerous, and we can, after the
scholarly sifting of recent years, now form a tolerably complete
and vivid conception of these corporations which, springing up
at first spontaneously, in defiance of government, or with its
reluctant connivance, were destined, under imperial control, to
petrify into an intolerable system of caste servitude in the last
century of the Empire of the West.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Roman Society in the Last Century
of the Western Empire</hi> (1st. ed.), p.
193.</note>
</p>

<p>
The sodalitia and collegia were of immemorial antiquity.
Certain industrial colleges and sacred sodalities were traced
back to Numa, and even to the foundation of Rome.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> (Morel) p. 28 sq.;
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 278; Plut.
<hi rend="italic">Numa</hi>, c. 17,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἦν δὲ διανομὴ κατὰ τὰς τέχνας αὐλητῶν, χρυσοχόων, κτλ.</foreign></note> In the
flourishing days of the Republic they multiplied without
restraint or suspicion, the only associations at which the law
looked askance being those which met secretly or by night.
It was only in the last century of the Republic that the
colleges came to be regarded as dangerous to the public peace,
and they were, with some necessary exceptions, suppressed by
a decree of the Senate in 64 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> They were revived again
for factious or revolutionary purposes in 58 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> by Clodius.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 76.</note>
The emperors Julius and Augustus abolished the free right of
association, except in the case of a few consecrated by their
antiquity or their religious character.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Caes.</hi> 42; <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> 32.</note> And it was enacted
that new colleges could not be created without special
authorisation. In the middle of the second century, the jurist
Gaius lays it down that the formation of new colleges
was restrained by laws, decrees of the Senate, and imperial
constitutions, although a certain number of societies, both in
Rome and the provinces, such as those of the miners, salt
workers, bakers, and boatmen, were authorised.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 84.</note> And down to
the time of Justinian, the right of free association was jealously
watched as a possible menace to the public peace. The
refusal of Trajan to sanction the formation of a company of
firemen in Nicomedia, with the reasons which he gave to
Pliny for his decision, furnishes the best concrete illustration
<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>of the imperial policy towards the colleges.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 34.</note> That the
danger from the colleges to the public order was not an
imaginary one, is clear from the passage in Tacitus describing
the bloody riots between the people of Nuceria and Pompeii in
the reign of Nero, which had evidently been fomented by
<q>illicit</q> clubs.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 17, re ad patres
relata ... collegia quae contra leges
instituerant dissoluta.</note> It is seen even more strikingly in the serious
troubles of the reign of Aurelian, when 7000 people were
killed in the organised outbreak of the workmen of the mint.<note place="foot">Vop. <hi rend="italic">Aurel.</hi> c. 38.</note>
Yet it is pretty clear that, in spite of legislation, and imperial
distrust, the colleges were multiplying, not only in Rome, but
in remote, insignificant places, and even in the camps, from
which the legislator was specially determined to avert their
temptations. In the blank wilderness, created by a universal
despotism, the craving for sympathy and mutual succour
inspired a great social movement, which legislation was powerless
to check. Just as in the reigns of Theodosius and
Honorius, imperial edicts and rescripts were paralysed by the
impalpable, quietly irresistible force of a universal social
need or sentiment. One simple means of evasion was provided
by the government itself, probably as early as the first
century. In an inscription of Lanuvium, of the year 136 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>,
there is a recital of a decree of the Senate according the
right of association to those who wish to form a funerary
college, provided the members did not meet more than once a
month to make their contributions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6086; cf. Momms.
<hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 98; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii.
313; Duruy, v. 408.</note> It appears from
Marcian’s reference to this law that other meetings for
purposes of religious observance might be held, the provisions
of the <hi rend="italic">senatusconsultum</hi> against illicit colleges being
carefully observed.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 87.</note> Mommsen has shown that many other
pious and charitable purposes could be easily brought within
the scope of the funerary association. And it was not
difficult for a society which desired to make a monthly
contribution for any purpose to take the particular form
recognised by the law. In the reign of M. Aurelius, although
membership of two colleges is still prohibited, the colleges
obtained the legal right to receive bequests, and to emancipate
<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>their slaves. And finally, Alexander Severus organised all
the industrial colleges and assigned them <hi rend="italic">defensores</hi>.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Alex. Sev.</hi> c. 33; cf. Duruy, v. 408.</note>
</p>

<p>
The law against illicit associations, with all its serious
penalties, remained in the imperial armoury. But the Empire,
which had striven to prevent combination, really furnished
the greatest incentive to combine. In the face of that world-wide
and all-powerful system, the individual subject felt, ever
more and more, his loneliness and helplessness. The imperial
power might be well-meaning and beneficent, but it was so
terrible and levelling in the immense sweep of its forces, that
the isolated man seemed, in its presence, reduced to the insignificance
of an insect or a grain of sand. Moreover, the aristocratic
constitution of municipal society became steadily more and more
exclusive. If the rich decurions catered for the pleasures of
the people, it was on the condition that they retained their
monopoly of political power and social precedence. The
plebeian crowd, recruited from the ranks of slavery, and ever
growing in numbers and, in their higher ranks, in wealth, did
not indeed dream of breaking down these barriers of exclusiveness;
but they claimed, and quietly asserted, the right to
organise a society of their own, for protection against oppression,
for mutual sympathy and support, for relief from the deadly
dulness of an obscure and sordid life. Individually weak and
despised, they might, by union, gain a sense of collective
dignity and strength. To our eyes, as perhaps to the eyes of
the Roman aristocrat, the dignity might seem far from imposing.
But these things are greatly a matter of imagination, and
depend on the breadth of the mental horizon. When the
brotherhood, many of them of servile grade, met in full conclave,
in the temple of their patron deity, to pass a formal
decree of thanks to a benefactor, and regale themselves with
a modest repast, or when they passed through the streets and
the forum with banners flying, and all the emblems of their
guild, the meanest member felt himself lifted for the moment
above the dim, hopeless obscurity of plebeian life.
</p>

<p>
No small part of old Roman piety consisted in a scrupulous
reverence for the dead, and a care to prolong their memory
by solid memorial and solemn ritual, it might be to maintain
some faint tie of sympathy with the shade which had passed
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>into a dim and rather cheerless world. The conception of
that other state was always vague, often purely negative. It
is not often that a spirit is sped on its way to join a loved
one in the Elysian fields, and we may fear that such phrases,
when they do occur, are rather literary and conventional.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4841, Elysiis campis
floreat umbra tibi; but cf. 4793, manus
levo contra deum qui me innocentem
sustulit; 4796, Dii irati aeterno somno
dederunt.</note> The
hope of blessed reunion after death seldom meets us till we
come to some monument of a Christian freedman.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4662, Qutia Silvana Uxor virum
expecto meum.</note> But two
of the deepest feelings in the Roman mind did duty for a
clear faith in the life beyond the tomb: one was family piety,
the other the passionate desire of the parting spirit to escape
neglect and oblivion. Whoever will cast his eyes over some
pages of the sepulchral inscriptions will be struck with the
intensity and warmth of affection, the bitterness of loss and
grief, which have been committed to the stone. The expressions,
of course, are often conventional, like obituary memorials in
every age. The model wife appears again and again, loving,
chaste, pious, a woman of the antique model, a keeper at home,
who spun among her maids and suckled her own children, who
never gave her husband a moment’s vexation, except when she
died.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2677, 2655, 4626, 4639, 4848,
Domum servavit, lanam fecit. Dixi, abei.</note> Good husbands seem to have been not less common.
And the wife’s grief sometimes far outruns the regular forms
of eulogy or regret. In one pathetic memorial of a union
formed in earliest youth, the lonely wife begs the unseen
Powers to let her have the vision of her spouse in the hours
of night, and bring her quickly to his side.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4775.</note> There is just the
same pure affection in the less regular, but often as stable,
unions of the slaves and soldiers, and the <hi rend="italic">contubernalis</hi> is
lamented with the same honourable affection as the great lady,
although the faulty Latin sometimes betrays the class to which
the author belongs. The slave world must always have its
shame and tragedy; yet many an inscription shows, by a
welcome gleam of light, that even there human love and ties
of family were not always desecrated.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2669, 4653, 2413, 2414.</note> The slave nurse
erects a monument to her little foster child; or a master and
mistress raise an affectionate memorial to two young <hi rend="italic">vernae</hi>
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>who died on one day. A freedman bewails, with warm sincerity,
a friendship begun in the slave market, and never interrupted
till the last fatal hour.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2815, 2817, 4687, 4777,
4653.</note> The common tragedies of affection
meet us on these slabs, as they are reproduced from age to
age with little variation. The prevalent note is, <hi rend="italic">Vale vale
in aeternum</hi>, with thoughts of the ghostly ferryman and the
infernal stream and hopeless separation. Now and then,
but seldom, a soul passes cheerfully from the light which it
has loved, happy to escape the burden of old age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4852, effugi crimen longa senecta
tuum.</note> And
sometimes, too, but seldom, we meet with a cold, hard grossness,
which looks back with perfect content upon a full
life of the flesh and takes the prospect of nothingness with a
cheerful acquiescence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4816, balnea, vina, Venus corrumpunt
corpora nostra, sed vitam
faciunt. Vixi; quod comedi et ebibi
tantum meum est. Non fui, fui; non
sum, non curo; 4807, 7407, 7387.</note>
</p>

<p>
The true Roman had a horror of the loneliness of death,
of the day when no kindly eye would read his name and
style upon the slab, when no hand for evermore would bring
the annual offering of wine and flowers. It is pathetic to see
how universal is the craving to be remembered felt even by
slaves, by men plying the most despised or unsavoury crafts.
The infant Julius Diadumenus, who has only drawn breath
for four hours, receives an enduring memorial. A wife consoles
her grief with the thought that her husband’s name and fame
will be forever prolonged by the slab which she dedicates.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4795, 7406.</note>
On another monument the traveller along the Flaminian Way
is begged to stop and read again the epitaph on a boy of nine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4836.</note>
Many are tortured by the fear of the desertion or the violation
of their <q>eternal home.</q> An old veteran bequeaths from his
savings a sum of about £80, to provide a supply of oil for
the lamp above his tomb.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4416.</note> An unguent seller of Montferrat
leaves a fine garden to afford to the guardians of his grave an
annual feast upon his birthday, and the roses which are to be
laid upon it for ever.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4417.</note> Many a prayer, by the gods of the
upper and the lower worlds, appeals to the passing wayfarer
not to disturb the eternal rest.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4781, 4783, 4.</note> The alienation or desecration
of a tomb is forbidden with curses or the threat of heavy
<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>penalties.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4386, 4357, 4360, 4362,
4388, 4396, 4423, 4425, 4427.</note> A place of burial was a coveted possession, which
was not easily attainable by the poor and friendless, and
practical persons guarded their repose against lawless intrusion
by requiring the delinquent to pay a heavy fine to the
municipal or to the imperial treasury, or to the pontifical
college. It was the most effectual way of securing the peace
of the dead. For the public authorities had a direct pecuniary
interest in enforcing the penalty for the desecration. But it
would be interesting to know how long these provisions to
protect for ever the peace of the departed fulfilled the hopes
of the testator.
</p>

<p>
The primary object of a multitude of colleges, like that
of the worshippers of Diana and Antinous at Lanuvium, was
undoubtedly, after the reign of Nerva, the care of the memory
of their members after death. In the remarkable inscription
of Lanuvium, as we have seen, the formal permission by
decree of the Senate, to meet once a month for the purpose of
a funerary contribution is recorded.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6086. Ex S.C.P.R. quibus
coire convenire collegiumque habere
liceat qui stipem menstruam conferre
volent in funera, in id collegium coeant
neque sub specie ejus collegii nisi
semel in mense coeant, etc.</note> It was a momentous
concession, and carried consequences which the legislator may
or may not have intended.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 313.</note> The jurist Marcian, who gives
an imperfect citation of this part of the decree, goes on to
add, that meetings for a religious purpose were not prohibited,
provided that the previous legislation against illicit societies
was observed.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 87.</note> And the law of the Lanuvian College shows
how often such meetings might take place. It did not need
much ingenuity to multiply occasions for reunion. The
anniversary of the foundation, the birthday of founders or
benefactors, the feast of the patron deity, the birthday of the
emperor, these and the like occasions furnished legal pretexts
for meetings of the society, when the members might have a
meal together, and when the conversation would not always
be confined to the funerary business of the college. At a
time when, according to juristic theory, a special permission
was needed for each new foundation, and when the authority
was grudgingly accorded, the whole vast plebeian mass of
petty traders, artisans, freedmen, and slaves were at one stroke
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>allowed to organise their societies for burial. We may
fairly assume that, liberally interpreted, the new law was
allowed to cover with its sanction many a college of which
funeral rites were not the sole, or even the primary object.
And this would be made all the easier because many of the
industrial colleges, and perhaps still more of the strictly
religious colleges, had a common burial-place, and often
received bequests for funerary purposes. This is the case,
for example, with a college of worshippers of Hercules at
Interamna, and a similar college at Reate.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2399, 2400.</note> A young Belgian,
belonging to the guild of armourers of the 20th legion,
was buried by his college at Bath.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4079.</note> One C. Valgius Fuscus
gave a burial-ground at Forum Sempronii, in Umbria, to a
college of muleteers of the Porta Gallica, for their wives or
concubines, and their posterity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4093.</note> There is even a burial-place,
duly defined by exact measurement, for those <q>who are in the
habit of dining together,</q> a description which, as time went
on, would have applied as accurately as any other to many
of these clubs.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4073, Loc. sep. convictor. qui
una epulo vesci solent.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are, by a rare piece of good fortune, admitted to the
interior of one of the purely funerary colleges. In the reign
of Hadrian there was at Lanuvium a college which, by a
curious fancy, combined the worship of the pure Diana
with that of the deified minion of the emperor. It was
founded in <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 133, three years after the tragic death of
the young favourite. And in 136, the patron of the society,
who was also a magnate of the town, caused it to be convened
in the temple of Antinous. There he announced
the gift of a sum of money, the interest of which was to be
spent at the festivals of the patron deities; and he directed
that the deed of foundation should be inscribed on the inner
walls of the portico of the temple, so that newly admitted
members might be informed of their rights and their obligations.
This document, discovered among the ruins of the
ancient Lanuvium in 1816, reveals many important facts in
the constitution and working of funerary colleges.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6086; Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 98;
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. p. 309 sqq.;
Duruy, v. 412.</note> It recites,
as we have seen, a part of the <hi rend="italic">senatusconsultum</hi>, which
<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>authorised the existence of such colleges, and after loyal
wishes for the prosperity of the emperor and his house, it
prays for an honest energy in contributing to the due interment
of the dead, that by regular payments the society may
prolong its existence.
</p>

<p>
The entrance fee of the college is to be 100 sesterces
(16s. 8d.), together with a flagon of good wine. A monthly
subscription of five asses is appointed. It is evident that
the members are of the humblest class, and one clause shows
that they have even a sprinkling of slaves among them, who,
with the permission of their masters, might connect themselves
with these burial clubs.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6086; Col. ii., placuit
ut quisquis servus ex hoc collegio liber
factus fuerit, etc.</note> The brethren could not aspire
to the erection even of a <hi rend="italic">columbarium</hi>, still less to the possession
of a common burial-ground. They confined themselves
to making a funeral grant of HS.300 to the appointed heir
of each member who had not intermitted his payments to the
common fund.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 99; Boissier,
<hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. p. 309.</note> Out of this sum, HS.50 are to be paid to
members present at the funeral. The member dying intestate
will be buried by the society, and no claim upon his remaining
interest in it will be recognised. The slave, whose
body was retained by his master after death, was to have a
<hi rend="italic">funus imaginarium</hi>, and probably a cenotaph. In the case
of a member dying within a radius of twenty miles from
Lanuvium, three members, on timely notice, were deputed to
arrange for the funeral, and required to render an account of the
expenses so incurred. A fee of HS.20 was granted to each.
But if any fraud were discovered in their accounts, a fine of
quadruple the amount was imposed. Lastly, when a member
died beyond the prescribed limit, the person who had arranged
his funeral, on due attestation by seven Roman citizens, and
security given against any further claims, received the burial
grant, with certain deductions.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 104.</note> In such precise and orderly
fashion, with all the cautious forms of Roman law, did this
poor little society order its performance of duty to the
dead.
</p>

<p>
Our knowledge of the funerary colleges is still further
amplified by an inscription of a date twenty years later than
<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>that of Lanuvium.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2417; Junio Rufino Cos. <hi rend="italic">i.e.</hi> <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 153; Momms. p. 73.</note> In the reign of Antoninus Pius a lady
named Salvia Marcellina resolved to commemorate her husband
by a gift to the college of Aesculapius and Hygia. She
presented to it the site for a shrine close to the Appian Way,
a marble statue of Aesculapius, and a hall opening on a terrace,
where the banquets of the brotherhood should be held. To
this benefaction Marcellina, along with one P. Aelius Zeno,
who apparently was her brother, added two donations of
HS.15,000 and HS.10,000 respectively, the interest of
which was to be distributed in money, or food and wine, at
six different festivals. The proportions assignable to each rank
in the college were determined at a full meeting, held in the
shrine of the <q>Divine Titus.</q> Marcellina attaches certain
conditions to her gift. The society is to be limited to sixty
members, and the place of each member, on his decease, is to
be filled by the co-optation of his son. If any member
chooses to bequeath his place and interest, his choice is
confined to his son, his brother, or his freedman, and he is
required to pay for this limited freedom of selection by refunding
one-half of his burial grant to the chest of the
college.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 93.</note> The college of Aesculapius is nominally a religious
and funerary corporation, yet there is only a single reference,
in a long document, to the subject of burial. No information is
given as to the amount of the <hi rend="italic">funeraticium</hi> or burial grant, the
sources from which it is derived, or the conditions on which
it is to be paid. The chief object of Marcellina seems to have
been to connect the memory of her husband with a number of
festivals, for the perpetuity of which she makes provision, to
promote social intercourse, and to prevent the intrusion of
strangers by making membership practically hereditary.
</p>

<p>
The colleges, of whose inner working we have tried to give
a picture, are classed as religious corporations in the collections
of the inscriptions. They bear the name of a god, and
they provide a solemn interment for their members. But in
these respects they do not differ from many other colleges
which are regarded as purely secular. The truth is, that any
attempt to make a sharp division of these societies on such
lines seems futile. Sepulture and religion being admitted by the
<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>government as legitimate objects for association, any college,
however secular in its tone, might, and probably would, screen
itself under sacred names. Nor would this be merely a
hypocritical pretence. It is clear that many of the purely
industrial colleges, composed as they were of poor people who
found it impossible to purchase a separate burial-place, and
not easy, unaided, to bear the expense of the last rites, at once
consulted their convenience, and gratified the sentiment of
fraternity, by arranging for a common place of interment.
And with regard to religion, it is a commonplace to point out
that all Graeco-Roman societies, great or small, rested on
religion. The state, the clan, the family, found their ideal
and firmest bond in reverence for divine or heroic ancestors, a
reverent piety towards the spirits who had passed into the
unseen world. The colleges, as we shall see presently, were
formed on the lines of the city which they almost slavishly
imitated.<note place="foot">They have their ordo, plebs, decuriones,
quinquennales, curatores,
honorati, patroni, quaestores, etc.; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
    <hi rend="italic">Henz. Ind.</hi> p. 176 sqq.</note> It would be strange and anomalous if they should
desert their model in that which was its most original and
striking characteristic. And just as Cleisthenes found divine
and heroic patrons for his new tribes and demes,<note place="foot">Herodot. v. 66.</note> so would a
Roman college naturally place itself under the protection of
one of the great names of the Roman pantheon. Sometimes,
no doubt, there may not have been much sincerity in this
conformity to ancient pieties. But do we need to remind
ourselves how long a life the form of ancient pieties may
have, even when the faith which gave birth to them has
become dim and faint?
</p>

<p>
The usual fashion of writing Roman history has concentrated
attention on the doings of the emperor, the life of the
noble class in the capital, or on the stations of the legions and
the political organisation of the provinces. It is a stately and
magnificent panorama. But it is apt to throw the life of the
masses into even deeper shadow than that in which time has
generally enwrapped them. We are prone to forget that,
behind all this stately life, there was a quiet yet extraordinarily
busy industrial activity which was its necessary
basis and which catered for all its caprices. In the most
cursory way Tacitus tells us that a great part of Italy
<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>was gathered for the great fair at Cremona, on the fateful
days when the town was stormed by the army of Vespasian.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 32, tempus quoque
mercatus ditem alioqui coloniam majore
opum specie complebat.</note>
Yet what a gathering it must have been! There were laid
out in the booths the fine woollens of Parma and Mutina, the
mantles of Canusium, the purples of Tarentum, the carpets
of Patavium. Traders from Ilva brought their iron wares,
Pompeii sent its fish sauces, and Lucania its famous sausages.
Nor would there be missing in the display the oil of Venafrum,
and the famous Setine and Falernian vintages.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Cena Trim. Einl.</hi> p. 63.</note> The improvement
of the great roads in the reign of Trajan must have
given a vast stimulus to inland commerce. And we may be
sure that many a petty merchant with his pack was to be
seen along the Aemilian or Flaminian ways, like the travelling
vendor of honey and cheese, whom Lucius, in the tale of
Apuleius, meets hurrying to Hypata.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> i. 5.</note> The great roads of
Spain, since the days of Augustus, carried an immense traffic,
which made even the distant Gades a magnificent emporium
and one of the richest places in the Roman world.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> i. 74.</note>
</p>

<p>
The wandering traders in Germany, Spain, or Syria, by a
natural instinct drew together in their exile. In the revolt
of Julius Civilis, they are found settled among the Batavians,
and a <hi rend="italic">collegium peregrinorum</hi> has left its memorial on the
lower Rhine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 178; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 5.</note> The <hi rend="italic">sodalicium urbanum</hi> at Bracara Augusta is
a similar society.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 2423.</note> Another mercantile college meets us at
Apulum in Dacia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 1500.</note> The Syrians of Berytus had a club at
Puteoli, and there were at least two clubs of Syrian traders at
Malaga.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x. 1634, 1579.</note> The graves of Syrian traders have been found at
Sirmium in Pannonia, and, on the other hand, there are
memorials of Roman merchants at Apamea and Tralles, at
Salamis and Mitylene.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 365, 444, 455, 6051.</note> Immense stimulus to this transmarine
trade must have been given by the Emperor Claudius, who
provided insurance against loss by storms, and a liberal system
of bounties and rewards for shipping enterprise.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> xviii.; cf. Merivale,
vi. 126 sq.</note> Apollonius
of Tyana once expostulated with a young Spartan, who claimed
descent from Callicratidas, for having forsaken the true career
<pb n="265"/><anchor id="Pg265"/>of a man of his race, to soil himself with the trade of
Carthage and Sicily. It is the sentiment of Juvenal who
treats as a lunatic the man who will venture his life with a
cargo on the wintry Aegean.<note place="foot">Juv. xiv. 276.</note> But the antiquarian rhetoric
attributed to Apollonius embalms the fact that at the opening
of a springtime in the reign of Domitian, a great merchant
fleet was lying at Malea, ready to sail to the western seas.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 34.</note>
These wandering merchants, wherever they went, banded themselves
in colleges for mutual protection and for society. In
the same way, old soldiers, on their return from long service
on the frontiers, gathered in military brotherhoods at such
places as Ostia or Misenum.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6111, 6835.</note> The veterans of Augustus seem
to have become a distinct and recognised class, like the
Augustales.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4109.</note> Colleges of youth sprang up everywhere from
the days of Nero, at Beneventum, Cremona, and Ameria, or at
Moguntiacum, Lauriacum, and Poetovio.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6414, 2211, 4095, 4100, 4096;
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 5928, 1493; iii. 4045, 5678.</note> They were formed,
like our own sporting clubs, for exercise and healthy rivalry,
often under the patronage of the divine hero who, to all the
moralists of that age, had become the mythic type of the
continent vigour of early manhood. There is one sodality at
least devoted to the preservation of chastity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2401.</note> But it is
balanced by the clubs of the <q>late sleepers</q> and <q>late
drinkers</q> of Pompeii.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iv. 575, 581.</note>
</p>

<p>
The colleges in which the artisans and traders of the
Antonine age grouped themselves are almost innumerable,
even in the records which time has spared. They represent
almost every conceivable branch of industry or special skill
or social service, from the men who laid the fine sand in the
arena, to the rich wine merchants of Lyons or Ostia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4063, 4072, 4087, 7007.</note> The
mere catalogue of these associations in an index will give an
enlarged conception of the immense range and minute specialisation
of Roman industry. It may be doubted whether a
similar enumeration of our English crafts would be longer or
more varied. The great trades, which minister to the first
necessities of human life, occupy of course the largest space,
the bakers, the cloth-makers, the smiths, carpenters, and wood-<pb n="266"/><anchor id="Pg266"/>merchants, trades often grouped together, the shoemakers
and fullers and carders of wool. The mechanics, who made
the arms and engines for the legions, naturally hold a
prominent place. Nor less prominent are the boatmen of
Ostia, and of the Rhone and the Saône.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4243, 7205, 6950.</note> The sailors of
these great rivers had several powerful corporations at
Lyons, and, on many an inscription,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7007, 7254, 4110, 6950.</note> claim the wealthiest
citizens, men who have gained the whole series of municipal
honours, as their chiefs and patrons. Arles, which was
then a great sea-port, had its five corporations of sailor-folk,
and Ostia an equal number, charged with the momentous
task of taking up the cargoes of the African corn-ships for
the bakeries of Rome.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3655, 6029, 3178.</note> Transport by land is represented by
colleges of muleteers and ass drivers in the Alps and Apennines.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4093, 7206.</note>
All the many trades and services which ministered to
the wants or pleasures of the capital were similarly banded
together, the actors and horn-blowers, the porters and paviors,
down to the humble dealers in pastils and salt fish.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4105, 2619, 4113, 4112, 2625.</note> We
have seen that even the gladiators, in their barrack-prisons,
were allowed to form their clubs. Although traces of these
combinations are found in remote and obscure places all
over the Roman world, it is at great commercial centres,
at Ostia, Puteoli, Lyons, and Rome itself, that they have
left the most numerous remains. They had probably for
one of their objects the protection of their members against
encroachments or fiscal oppression. Strabo once came across a
deputation of fishermen on their way to plead with the Emperor
for a reduction of their dues.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. p. 286.</note> Yet it would be a mistake to
suppose that these trades unions were always organised for
trade objects, or that the separate colleges were composed of
people engaged in the same occupation. They had many
honorary members from among the richer classes, and, even
in the lower ranks, in defiance of the law,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Dig.</hi> L. 7.</note> a dealer in salt
might be enrolled among the boatmen of the Rhone, and
member of a college of builders.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 287.</note> In truth, the great object
of association among these humble people appears to have
been not so much the protection of their trade, as the cheer<pb n="267"/><anchor id="Pg267"/>fulness of intercourse, the promotion of fellowship and good-will,
the relief of the dulness of humdrum lives.
</p>

<p>
Probably no age, not even our own, ever felt a greater
craving for some form of social life, wider than the family,
and narrower than the State. It was a movement at which,
as we have seen, even the greatest and strongest of the
emperors had to connive. It penetrated society down to
its lowest layers. Even the slaves and freedmen of great
houses organised themselves in colleges. There were colleges
in the imperial household.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6302.</note> T. Aelius Primitivus, chief of the
imperial kitchen, being a man of great posthumous ambition,
left the care of his own and his wife’s monument to the
college of the palatine cooks.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi></note> In the inscriptions of Moesia
there is the album of a Bacchic club of household slaves
containing 80 names, with apparently different grades among
them, designated by such titles as <hi rend="italic">archimysta</hi>, <hi rend="italic">bouleuta</hi>, <hi rend="italic">frater</hi>
and <hi rend="italic">filius</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 2, 6150.</note> A similar club of the servile class, devoted to
the worship of Isis, existed at Tarraco.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 6004.</note> The officers of
another bear the pompous titles of tribune, quaestor, and
triumvir, and the slab records the thanks of one Hilara,
that her ashes have been allowed to mingle in the same urn
with those of Mida the chamberlain.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2863, Hilara viva rogavit
ut ossa sua in olla Midaes coicerentur
cum mort. esset.</note> A provincial treasurer
at Ephesus, who was a <hi rend="italic">verna Augusti</hi>, commits the custody
of his wife’s monument to five colleges of slaves and freedmen
in the emperor’s household. One of the colleges bears the
name of Faustina. Another college is devoted to the cult
of the Lares and images of Antoninus Pius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 6077, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> note.</note> Private masters
seem to have encouraged the formation of such associations
among their dependents, and sometimes to have endowed
them with a perpetual foundation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2386, 4938, 4123.</note> It was probably politic,
as well as kind, to provide for slaves social pleasures within
the circle of the household, and thus to forestall the attractions
of the numerous clubs outside, which freely offered their
hospitality.<note place="foot">Such as that in <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6086.</note> We may be sure that the college <q>which was
in the house of Sergia Paulina</q> was not encouraged by the
mistress without good reason.
</p>

<pb n="268"/><anchor id="Pg268"/>

<p>
Thus it appears that in every part of the Roman world,
in the decaying little country town, and in the great trading
centres, the same great movement of association, is going
on apace. It swept into its current almost every social grade,
and every trade, handicraft or profession, the pastil-makers,
the green-grocers and unguent sellers of Rome, the muleteers
of the Alps, the fullers of Pompeii, the doctors at Beneventum,
the boatmen of the Seine, the wine merchants of Lyons. Men
formed themselves into these groups for the most trivial or
whimsical reasons, or for no reason at all, except that they
lived in the same quarter, and often met.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6010, Colleg. Capitolinorum, etc.; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">Ad Quint. Fratr.</hi> ii. 5.</note> From the view
which the inscriptions give us of the interior of some of these
clubs, it is clear that their main purpose was social pleasure.
And this is especially true of the clubs of the humblest class.
M. Boissier has well remarked that the poor workman, the
poor freedman, with the brand of recent slavery upon him,
who was often engaged in some mean or disgusting occupation,
amidst a society which from tradition regarded any industry
soiled by servile touch with distant scorn, must have felt
themselves solitary exiles in the desert of a great town, the
most awful desert in the world. The remote splendour of the
court and aristocratic life must have deepened the gloom of
isolation and helplessness. Shut out for ever from that
brilliant world of fashion and pleasure and power, whose social
life seemed so charming and gay and friendly, the despised and
lonely toiler sought a refuge in little gatherings of people as
lonely as himself. At some chance meeting, some one, more
energetic than the rest, would throw out the suggestion to form
a club, on the model of some of the old trade societies which
had always been authorised by the State from the days of
Numa, or of those newer associations which were now tacitly
permitted under the guise of religion. A small entrance fee
would meet, for the time, their modest expenses. In that age
of generous or ambitious profusion, it was not hard to find
some influential patron, a kindly gracious noble, or an aspiring
or generous <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi>, to give the infant society his countenance,
along with a substantial donation for the building of a club-house,
and for simple convivial pleasures on his birthday, and
other festivals which could easily be multiplied. Then the
<pb n="269"/><anchor id="Pg269"/>brethren met in solemn form to frame their constitution and
commemorate their benefactor, on one of those many monuments
which illuminate a social life on which the literature of
the age is generally silent.
</p>

<p>
The continuity and repetition of proved political organisation
is a notable characteristic of the great races which have
left, or are destined to leave, their mark on history. The
British settlers on the prairies of Oregon or Manitoba immediately
order themselves into communities, which are modelled
on a social system as old as the Heptarchy. The Latin
race had perhaps an even more stubborn conservatism than
the English. Under the most various circumstances, the
Roman instinctively clung to forms and institutions of tested
strength and elasticity, and consecrated by the immemorial
usage of his race. The most distant and most humble municipality
was fashioned after the pattern of the great <q>city which
had become a world.</q><note place="foot">Rutil. Namat. i. 63.</note> It had its senate, the <hi rend="italic">ordo splendidissimus
et amplissimus</hi>, and the popular assembly which elected
the magistrates. The municipal magistrates, if they do not
always bear the ancient names, reproduce in shadowy form
the dictators, the praetors, the aediles, quaestors, and censors of
the old republic.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz. Ind.</hi> p. 154 sqq.</note> The same continuity of form is seen in the
colleges. As the municipal town was modelled on the constitution
of the State, so we may say that the college was modelled
on the municipal town. The college, indeed, became a city for
the brotherhood, at once a city and a home. They apply to it
such terms as <hi rend="italic">respublica collegii</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4068, 4107.</note> The meetings often took place
in a temple, whether of a patron deity or of an emperor, as
those of the Roman Senate were held in the temple of Concord
or of Bellona. There they elected their administrative officers,
generally for a period of one year; in some cases, by way of
special distinction, for life. The heads of these little societies
bear various names, <hi rend="italic">magistri</hi>, <hi rend="italic">curatores</hi>, <hi rend="italic">quinquennales</hi>, <hi rend="italic">praefecti</hi>,
or <hi rend="italic">praesides</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6127, 7181, 7182, 3217, 4138 (<hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Orelli’s note to this Inscription), 4071;
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. p. 1163; iii. (2) p. 1180.</note> They have also quaestors,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2863, 7183, 5372.</note> who managed their
financial affairs, which, although perhaps on no great scale,
still involved the investment of trust moneys to yield the
prescribed amounts which had to be distributed either as burial
<pb n="270"/><anchor id="Pg270"/>payments, or in food and money on the high festivals. The
number of the members was generally limited, either by the
government in the interests of public order, or by the will of
a benefactor, to prevent the progressive diminution in the
value of the divisible shares of the income.<note place="foot"> <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2417, ut ne plures adlegantur
quam numerus s. s. etc.; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii.
1167, collegio hominum centum <sic>dumtaxet</sic>
constituto. Cf. Plin. x. 33, where
the coll. fabrorum is to be limited to
150.</note> A periodical
revision of the roll of members was therefore conducted every
five years, as it was in the municipality, by the chief officers,
exercising for the time censorial powers in miniature. Fortunately
the albums of three or four colleges have been preserved.
The lists throw a vivid light on their constitution and social
tone. We have drawn attention in a former chapter to the
strict gradation of social rank in the city polity. The same
characteristic is repeated in the collegiate organisation. In these
humble plebeian coteries, composed of <q>men without a grandfather,</q>
of men, perhaps, whose father was a slave, or of men
who were slaves themselves, there emerges, to our astonishment,
a punctilious observance of shadowy social distinctions, which
is an inheritance from the exclusive aristocratic pride of the
old republic. This characteristic has excited in some French
critics and historians a certain admiration,<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 295.</note> in which it is
not altogether easy to join. Gradation of rank to ensure
devotion and order in public service is a precious and admirable
thing. But artificial and unreal distinctions, invented and
conferred to flatter wealth, to stimulate or reward the largesses
of the rich patron, to gratify the vulgar self-complacency of
the <hi rend="italic">parvenu</hi>, are only a degrading form of mendicancy. Some
indulgence is no doubt due to men who were still under the yoke
of slavery, or only just released from it; the iron had entered
into their souls. But both the college and the municipality
of the Antonine age cannot be relieved of the charge of
purchased or expectant deference to mere wealth. Hence we
cannot altogether share the pleasure of M. Boissier in these
pale and vulgar reproductions of the hierarchy of a real
aristocracy. But the image of the hierarchy is there, and it is
very instructive. In a college of smiths in Tarraconensis, there
were fifteen patrons at the head of the roll, followed by
twelve decurions, including two doctors and a soothsayer, one
<pb n="271"/><anchor id="Pg271"/>man isolated by the honours of the <hi rend="italic">bisellium</hi>, two honorary
members, twenty-eight plain plebeians. There were also several
<q>mothers</q> and <q>daughters</q> of the society.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4055.</note> The album of
another club at Ostia shows a list of nine patrons, two holders
of quinquennial rank, and one hundred and twenty-three
plebeians.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4054, 2417, 4056.</note> The plebs of many colleges included slaves, and
in more than one inscription the men of ingenuous and those
of servile birth are carefully distinguished, the slaves being
sometimes placed at the bottom of the roll.<note place="foot">The ranks are mingled, however,
in <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2394; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 633.</note> Yet it was surely
a great advance when slaves and freemen could meet together
for the time, on a certain footing of equality, for business or
convivial intercourse. The rigid lines of old pagan society are
indeed still marked on the face of these clubs. And yet many
an inscription leaves the impression that these little societies
of the old pagan world are nurseries, in an imperfect way, of
the gentle charities and brotherliness which, in shy retirement,
the young Church was cultivating in her disciples to be
the ideal of the world.
</p>

<p>
These colleges became homes for the homeless, a little
fatherland, or <hi rend="italic">patria</hi>, for those without a country. Sometimes
they may have met in low taverns, which were on that
account jealously watched by some of the emperors.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 60. 6,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τά τε καπελεῖα ἐς ἃ συνιόντες ἔπινον κατέλυσε, κτλ.</foreign></note> But
they generally attained to the possession of a club-room or
<hi rend="italic">schola</hi>, a name which had been previously given to the
lounging-room of the public baths. Sometimes the <hi rend="italic">schola</hi>
was erected at their own cost, the site being perhaps granted
by some rich patron, or by the town council, on a vacant
spot close to the basilica or the theatre.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4088, 3298, 2279, 3787,
4085.</note> But frequently a
hall was built for them by some generous friend. A like
generosity often provided for them a little chapel of their
patron deity, with a shaded court, or a balcony open to the
air and sun, where the brethren took their common meals.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2417, solarium tectum junctum
in quo populus collegi s. s. epuletur.</note>
Or a rich patron, anxious to secure some care and religious
observance of his last resting-place, would bequeath to a
college a pleasant garden adjoining the tomb, with a house
in which to hold their meetings.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4070.</note> And, as a further security
<pb n="272"/><anchor id="Pg272"/>against neglect and oblivion, a sum of 10,000 or 15,000
sesterces would be invested to provide a dinner for the
college on their benefactor’s birthday.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 65, 900, 4088; cf. 4107,
4366.</note> As years went on,
the scene of many a pleasant gathering became a centre
round which clustered a great deal of sentiment, and even
pride. We may imagine that, allowing for differences of
time and faith, the little school or shrine would, in the course
of years, attract something of the feeling which consecrates
an ancient village church in England, or a little Bethel which
was built in the year of the visit of John Wesley. It became
a point of honour to make gifts to the schola, to add to its
comfort or beauty. One benefactor would redeem a right of
ancient lights, or build a boundary wall.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2416, 4057.</note> Another would
make a present of bronze candelabra on a marble stand, with
the device of a Cupid holding baskets in his hands.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4068.</note> Or a
college would receive from its curator a gift of some silver
statues of the gods, on the dedication of the <hi rend="italic">schola</hi>, with a
brass tablet, no doubt recording the event.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2502.</note> The gift of a
place where the brethren of the club might be buried beside
their wives or concubines, was probably, to these poor people,
not the least valued benefaction.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2400, 4093.</note> Many a humble donation
was probably made, which was too slight for a memorial.
But it happens that we have one record of gifts evidently
offered by poor, insignificant people. It is contained in a very
interesting inscription found upon a rock near the theatre at
Philippi in Macedonia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 1, 633.</note> It records that P. Hostilius Philadelphus,
in recognition of the aedileship of the college, which
had been conferred upon him, bore the expense of polishing
the rock, and inscribing upon it the names of the members of
a college of Silvanus, sixty-nine in number, together with a list
of those who had presented gifts to their temple. The college
was a religious one, with a priest who is named in the first
place. It is also a funerary society, and seems to be composed
of freedmen and of slaves, either belonging to the colony
or private masters. They had just erected a temple of their
patron god, to which some had given subscriptions in money,
while others made various offerings for its adornment. One
<pb n="273"/><anchor id="Pg273"/>brother presents an image of the god in a little shrine, another
statuettes of Hercules and Mercury. There is another
donation of some stone-work in front of the temple, and
Hostilius, at his own expense, cut away the rock to smooth
the approach to the shrine. Most of the gifts are of trifling
value, a poor little picture worth 15 <hi rend="italic">denarii</hi>, a marble image
of Bacchus costing not much more. But they were the
offerings of an enthusiastic brotherhood, and the good Hostilius
has given them an immortality of which they never dreamed.
</p>

<p>
The contributions of the members would generally have
been but a sorry provision for the social and religious life of a
college. Reproducing, as it did, the constitution and the tone
of the city in so many traits, the college in nothing follows
its model so closely as in its reliance on the generosity of
patronage. At the head of the album of the society there
is a list, sometimes disproportionately long, of its <hi rend="italic">patroni</hi>.
Countless inscriptions leave us in no doubt as to the reason
why the patron was elected. His <hi rend="italic">raison d’être</hi> in the
club is the same as in the city; it is to provide luxuries or
amusements for the society, which the society could not
generally obtain for itself. The relation of patron and client
is, of all the features of ancient life, the one which, being so
remote from the spirit of our democratic society, is perhaps
most difficult for us to understand. The mutual obligations,
enforced by a powerful traditional sentiment, were of the most
binding, and sometimes burdensome character. And in that
form of relation, between former master and freedman, which
became so common in the first age of the Empire, the old
master was bound to continue his support and protection to
the emancipated slave.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 203.</note> Although there was much that
was sordid and repulsive in the position of the client in
Juvenal’s and Martial’s days, we must still recognise the fact
that the fortune of the rich patron had to pay a heavy price
for social deference. Not less heavy was the demand made
on the patrons of municipalities and colleges.
</p>

<p>
There must have been wide distinctions of dignity and
importance among the industrial colleges of the Empire.
The <hi rend="italic">centonarii</hi>, the <hi rend="italic">fabri</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">dendrophori</hi> of the more
important centres, such as Aquileia, Lyons and Milan, the
<pb n="274"/><anchor id="Pg274"/>boatmen of Arles or Ostia, would probably have looked
down with scorn on the flute-players of the Via Sacra, the
hunters of Corfinium, or the muleteers of the Porta Gallica.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4082, 4118.</note>
And there was a corresponding variety in the rank of the
patrons. Some are high officials of the Empire, procurators
of provinces, curators of great public works, or distinguished
officers of the legions. Or they are men evidently of high
position and commanding influence in their province, priests
of the altar of Augustus, augurs of the colony, magistrates
or decurions of two or three cities.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4082, 194, 73, 4077, 6654, 4109,
4069; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 1, 1209, 1497, 1051;
x. 228; 1696; 3910.</note> Sometimes the
patron is a great merchant, with warehouses of oil or wine
at Lyons or Tarragona or Ostia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7007, 4109.</note> Yet in spite of his wealth,
the patron’s social position in those days might be rather
uncertain, and we may without difficulty, from modern
analogies, believe that a new man might find his vanity
soothed, or his position made less obscure, by being known
as the titular head of an ancient corporation of the clothworkers,
or <hi rend="italic">dendrophori</hi>, or of the boatmen on the Saône.
Probably in obscure country towns, remote from the seat of
Empire, these bourgeois dignities were even more valued.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 1968; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3927,
3321, 6275.</note> The
humbler colleges would have to be content with one of the new
freedmen, such as the vulgar friends of Trimalchio, who, after
a youth of shameful servitude, had leapt into fortune by
some happy chance or stroke of shrewdness, and who sought
a compensation for the contempt of the great world in the
deference and adulation of those who waited for their largesses.
</p>

<p>
The election of a patron was an event of great moment,
especially to a poor college. And it was conducted with a
formal preciseness, and an assumption of dignity, which, at this
distance of time, are sometimes rather ludicrous. In a little town
of Cisalpine Gaul in the year 190, the college of smiths and
clothworkers met in solemn session in their temple. Their
quaestors, who may have had the financial condition of the
college in view, made a formal proposal that the college should
set an example of the judicious reward of merit, by electing
one Tutilius Julianus, a man distinguished by his modesty
and liberality, as the patron of their society. The meeting
<pb n="275"/><anchor id="Pg275"/>commended the sage proposal of the quaestors, and formally
resolved that the honourable Julianus should be requested
to accept the distinction, with an apology for so tardy a
recognition of his merits, and that a brass plate, containing a
copy of this decree, should be placed above his door.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4133.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is significant that the patrons were, in very many cases,
Seviri and Augustales, a body which in the provinces, as we have
seen, was generally composed of new men of the freedman class.
Although they were steadily rising in importance and in strength
of organisation, the provincial Augustales always ranked after
the decurions of a town. They often displayed boundless
liberality to their city and to their own order.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7116, 3914, 3923, 4080, qui
facultates suas coll. reliq.</note> But the
leading Augustales seem to have been quite as generous to the
other corporations who placed themselves under their patronage.
And they were not unfrequently patrons of several colleges.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4109; 194, 4069, 4071, 4094,
7194.</note>
It is no long task to find men who were the titular protectors
of two or three, of eight, or even of as many as twelve or
fifteen colleges. One inscription to Cn. Sentius of Ostia would
seem to include among his dependents almost every industrial
college in that busy port.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4109.</note> Sentius must have been a very
wealthy and a very generous man to accept the patronage of
so many societies, which in those days expected or demanded
that their honours should be paid for in solid cash. The
crowning distinction of a statue, or a durable inscription, was
often solemnly decreed with all seemly forms of deference or
unstinted flattery in a full meeting of the society. But in a
great majority of cases we are amused or disgusted to read
that, after all his other liberalities, the benefactor or his heir
is permitted to pay for the record of popular gratitude.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3724, honore usus impensam
remisit; cf. 7011, 6992, 7190, so
<hi rend="italic">passim</hi>.</note> This
fact may explain the extraordinary abundance of these honours,
if it somewhat lowers their value in the eyes of posterity.
</p>

<p>
But, besides the benefactions which sprang either from
ambition or real generosity, a vast number were inspired by the
Roman passion for long remembrance, and for the continuity
of funerary ritual. The very position of so many tombs by
the side of the great roads beyond the city gates, was a silent
<pb n="276"/><anchor id="Pg276"/>appeal to the passing traveller not to forget the departed. The
appeal is also often expressly made on the stone by those who
had no other means of prolonging their own memory or that of
some one they loved. It is impossible to read without some
emotion the prayer of an old Spanish soldier, that his brethren
of the college may never suffer grief like his, if they will only
keep the lamp burning for ever over the tomb of his child.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 2102.</note> The
more opulent took more elaborate measures to provide for the
guardianship of their <q>last home.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4371, 4070, 4400, 7365;
cf. Marq. <hi rend="italic">Pr.</hi> i. 370.</note> They often attached to the
tomb a field or gardens of considerable extent, to be cultivated
for profit, or to bear the roses for the annual offering.
The whole area, the dimensions of which, in many inscriptions,
are defined with mathematical precision, would be surrounded
by a wall. Within the enclosure there would be a little
shrine containing statues of the dead, an arbour and a well, and
a hall in which the kindred of coming generations might hold
their annual banquet, till the tie was dissolved by the cruel oblivion
of time.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4456 aediculae in quibus
simulacra, etc., 4510, 4400 area quae
ante se est maceria cincta long. p. x̅l̅i̅i̅x̅., lat. p. x̅x̅x̅i̅x̅., 7365, 4337, 4070,
4085.</note> There will be a cottage (<hi rend="italic">taberna</hi>) in which a freedman
or dependent of the house may be lodged, to watch over the
repose of the dead.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4366 ejusque mausolei claves
duae penes aliquem libertorum meorum
... sint, 4637, 4353.</note> But all these precautions, as the testator
feels, were likely to be defeated in the end by the vicissitudes
of human fortunes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6206.</note> He had, indeed, before his eyes the fate
of many a forsaken and forgotten tomb of old worthies of the
Republic. Families die out; faithful freedmen and their children
cannot keep their watch for ever. The garden will grow
wild, a time may come when no kindly hand will pour the
libation or scatter the roses on the natal day. Families will die
out, but a college may go on for ever by the perpetual renewal
of its members. Inspired with this idea, a worthy of Nîmes
created a funerary college to dine regularly in his honour.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4366.</note>
It was to consist of thirty persons, and the number was
to be maintained by co-optation into the places of deceased
members. Members of the college who were obliged to be
absent might send one of their friends to join in the repast.
Thus the dead man, who had taken such care to prolong his
<pb n="277"/><anchor id="Pg277"/>memory, would at no distant date be festively celebrated by
people who barely knew his name. Many another left a
bequest to a college to be spent in a feast on the testator’s
memorial day.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 3999, 4076, 4107, 4088.</note> A freedman of Mevania leaves a tiny
legacy of HS.1000 to the guild of clothworkers, of whom he
is patron, with the condition that not less than twelve of
their number shall feast once a year in memory of him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 3999.</note> A
more liberal provision for convivial enjoyment was left to
a college of Silvanus in honour of Domitian. It consisted
of the rents of four estates, with their appurtenances, which
were to be spent on the birthdays of the emperor and his
wife, <q>for all time to come,</q> with the sacrifices proper to
such a holy season.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6085.</note> Due provision is often made for the
seemly and impressive performance of a rite which was at
once a religious duty and a convivial pleasure. There is
a curious letter of the time of Antoninus Pius containing a
deed of gift to the college of the <hi rend="italic">fabri</hi> at Narbo, in return for
their constant favours to the donor. One Sextus Fadius
presents them with the sum of 16,000 sesterces, the interest
of which is to be divided every year at the end of April for
ever, at a banquet on his birthday; the guests on this festive
occasion are to be habited in their handsomest attire.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7215 (<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 149).</note>
</p>

<p>
But the fullest and minutest arrangements for these modest
meals are to be found in the document relating to the foundation
of the poor college of Diana and Antinous, to which reference
has already been made. The master of the feast was taken in
regular order from the roll of the society. Each brother had to
accept this office in his turn, or pay a fine of five shillings of our
money. The regular festivals of the club were six in the year,
on the natal days of Diana and Antinous, and those of the
founder and some of his relatives. There is some obscurity in
the regulations for these common feasts, and at first sight they
are a ludicrous contrast to the pontiff’s famous banquet in the
days of Julius Caesar, described by Macrobius.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> iii. 13, 11-13.</note> M. Boissier
naturally refuses to imagine that even the poor brethren of the
club of Diana and Antinous would be contented with bread,
four sardines, a bottle of good wine, with hot water and the
<pb n="278"/><anchor id="Pg278"/>proper table service. The slave steward of Horace probably
found much better fare in his <hi rend="italic">popina</hi>.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> ii. 319; Marq.
<hi rend="italic">Pr.</hi> i. 208; Hor. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 14, 21.</note> Dr. Mommsen has
resolved the mystery. It is evident, from several inscriptions,
that <hi rend="italic">sportulae</hi> were sharply distinguished from distributions of
bread and wine.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Colleg.</hi> p. 109; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
2385 (panem vinum et sportulas dedit),
3949.</note> The <hi rend="italic">sportula</hi> was a gift of richer food or
dainties, which in public distributions might be carried home;
it was sometimes an equivalent in money. If those who
received the <hi rend="italic">sportula</hi> preferred to enjoy it at a common table,
an appointed member of the college would have the food
prepared, or convert the money into dishes for the feast. The
bread and wine he might add from his own pocket, if they were
not provided by the foundation. How much for these meals
came from the club funds, and how much out of the pocket of
the <hi rend="italic">magister coenae</hi>, is not always clearly stated. But we may
be sure, from the tone of the times, that additions to a modest
<hi rend="italic">menu</hi> were often made by the generosity of patrons and officers
of the club.
</p>

<p>
It would be futile and uninteresting to pursue into all its
minute details throughout the inscriptions, the system of
<hi rend="italic">sportulae</hi> founded by so many patrons and benefactors. Any
one who wishes can temperately regale himself for hours at
these shadowy club-feasts of the second century. Perhaps
the clearest example of such distributions is the donation of
Marcellina and Aelius Zeno to the little college of Aesculapius,
to which reference has been made for another purpose.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2417.</note> On
seven different anniversaries and festivals, sums of money, with
bread and wine, were distributed to the brethren of the college
in due proportions, according to their official dignity and social
rank. Thus, in the division on the 4th of November, the fête-day
of the society, the shares in money, according to the various
grades, from the father of the college downwards, are six, four,
and two. The division of the wine, according to social rank,
follows the proportion of nine, six, and three. A slightly different
scale is followed on the birthday of the Emperor Antoninus
Pius in September, and on the day for New Year’s gifts in
January. But in these benefactions the difference of grade is
always observed, the patron and the chief magistrates and
<pb n="279"/><anchor id="Pg279"/>magnates of the society always receiving a larger share than
the obscure brethren at the bottom of the list. In the college
of Aesculapius, Marcellina herself, and Aelius Zeno, the two
great benefactors of the society, along with the highest of its
dignitaries, are allotted three times as much as the plebeian
brother. The excellent Marcellina, who, in the fourth century
might perhaps have followed S. Jerome and Paula to Bethlehem,
was the widow of a good and tender husband, who had been
curator of the imperial picture galleries.<note place="foot">Fl. Apolloni Proc. Aug. qui fuit a
pinacothecis.... Optimi piissimi, etc.</note> Had she been drawn
into the ranks of that hidden society, who were beginning to
lay their dead in the winding vaults beneath the Appian Way,
she would certainly have dealt out her bounty on a different
scale and on different principles. Her bequest to the college
of Aesculapius reveals how deep in the soul of a charitable
pagan woman, who was probably sprung from servile stock,
lay that aristocratic instinct of the Roman world which survived
the advent of the Divine Peasant and the preaching of the
fishermen of Galilee, for far more than four hundred years.
</p>

<p>
The most curious and interesting among the regulations for
these club entertainments are those relating to order and
decorum. The club of Diana and Antinous was not very
select, being probably composed of poor freedmen and slaves.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6086, quisquis ex hoc
collegio servus defunctus fuerit, etc.;
cf. the composition of the club in <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
2394.</note>
The manners of this class, if we may judge by the picture
given by Petronius, were, to say the least, wanting in reserve
and self-restraint. The great object of such reunions was, as
the founder tells us, that the brethren might dine together
cheerfully and quietly.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ut quieti et hilares diebus
solemnibus epulemur, etc.</note> Hence he most wisely orders that
all serious proposals and complaints shall be reserved for
business meetings. If any member quits his place or makes
a disturbance, he is to pay a fine of four sesterces. Twelve
sesterces is the penalty for insulting a fellow-guest. The
man who, under the influence of good wine, so far forgot
himself as to insult the chief officer of the society, was to be
punished by a forfeit of twenty sesterces, which would probably
be a powerful discouragement of bad manners to most of the
brotherhood of Antinous.
</p>

<p>
Many another gift or bequest, of the same character as
<pb n="280"/><anchor id="Pg280"/>Marcellina’s, meets the eye of the student of the inscriptions
The motives are singularly uniform—to repay the honours conferred
by a college, to celebrate the dedication of a statue, to
save from forgetfulness a name which to us is only a bit of the
wreckage of time. Everything is conventional about these bequests.
The money is nearly always left for the same purpose,
an anniversary repast in honour of the humble dead, of the
emperor, or of the patron gods. Sometimes the burial fee is
refunded to the college, with the prayer that on the natal
day the poor pittance derived from the gift be spent on pious
rites, with roses strewn upon the grave.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4107.</note> Another will beg only
that the lamp in the humble vault may be kept for ever burning.
These pieties and longings, which have their roots in a
rude pagan past before the dawn of history, were destined to
prolong their existence far into Christian times. The lamp
will be kept burning over many a tomb of saint or martyr in
the fourth or fifth century. And the simple feasts which the
clothworkers of Brescia, or the boatmen of Ostia or Lyons,
observed to do honour to some departed patron, will be
celebrated, often in riotous fashion, over the Christian dead
in the days of S. Augustine and S. Paulinus of Nola.<note place="foot">S. Paul. Nol. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> xxvii. 547-585;
S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 32; <hi rend="italic">Serm.</hi> v.</note>
</p>

<p>
Dr. Mommsen believes that the collegiate life which blossomed
forth so luxuriantly in the early Empire, was modelled
on the sacred union of the Roman family.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 3.</note> And the instinct
of the Roman nature for continuity in institutions prepossesses
us in favour of the theory. In the college endowed by
Marcellina and Zeno, there are a father and a mother, and elsewhere
we read of daughters of a college. The members sometimes
call themselves brethren and sisters.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2417, 4055, 2392, 3774,
3815, 1485, 4134.</note> One of the feasts
of the brotherhood is on the day sacred to <q>dear kinship,</q> when
relations gathered round a common table, to forget in kindly
intercourse any disturbance of affection.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2417, Item viii K. Mart. die
Karae cognationis eodem loco dividerent
sportulas, etc.</note> They also met in the
early days of January, when presents were exchanged. Above
all, like the primal society, they gathered on the birthdays of
the revered dead to whom they owed duty and remembrance.
And in many cases the members of the society reposed beside
<pb n="281"/><anchor id="Pg281"/>one another in death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2399, 4073, 4093.</note> The college was a home of fraternal
equality in one sense. As M. Boissier has pointed out, the
members had equal rights in the full assembly of the club.
A quorum was needed to pass decrees and to elect the officers.
And, in the full conclave, the slave member had an equal voice
with the freeman, and might, perchance, himself even be elected
to a place of dignity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> i. 1406; ii. 5927.</note> He might thus, in a very humble realm,
wield authority for the time over those who were accustomed
to despise him. It is true that he needed his master’s leave
to join a college, and his master had the legal power to deny
to him the last boon of burial by the hands of his collegiate
brethren.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi> p. 102; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
viii. 16.</note> Yet it was undoubtedly a great stride in advance
when a slave could sit at table or in council on equal terms
with free-born men, and might receive pious Roman burial,
instead of being tossed like a piece of carrion into a nameless
grave. The society of one of these humble colleges must
have often for the moment relieved the weariness and misery
of the servile life, and awakened, or kept alive, some sense
of self-respect and dignity. The slave may have now and
then felt himself even on the edge of political influence, as
when his college placarded its sympathies in an election contest
on the walls of Pompeii. Yet we must not allow ourselves to
be deceived by words and appearances. In spite of legislative
reform, in spite of a growing humane sentiment, whether in the
Porch or the Christian Church, the lot of the slave and of the
poor plebeian will be in many respects as hopeless and degraded
in the reign of Honorius as it was in the reign of Trajan.<note place="foot">For the contempt for slaves in the
fourth and fifth centuries, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> S. Hieron.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 54, § 5; Salv. <hi rend="italic">De Gub. Dei</hi>, iv. 26.
For humaner sentiment, cf. Macrob.
<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 11, 12 sqq.; <hi rend="italic">C. Theod.</hi> ix. 6, 2,
3, vii. 13, 8; ix. 7, 4; ix. 9, 1; ix. 12,
1.</note> Even
in the reign of Trajan, it is true, perhaps even in the reign of
Nero, there were great houses like the younger Pliny’s, where
the slaves were treated as humble friends, where their weddings
were honoured by the presence of the master, where, in spite
of legal disabilities, they were allowed to dispose of their
savings by will.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> viii. 16, § 1; on the more
humane feeling to slaves, cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
47; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 24, 32; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i.
18; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 18, 19, 20; Juv. xiv.
16; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 18; Wallon,
<hi rend="italic">L’Esclav.</hi> i. c. 11; Marq. <hi rend="italic">Pr.</hi> i. 177.</note> And the inscriptions record the gratitude
<pb n="282"/><anchor id="Pg282"/>and affection to their masters and mistresses of many who
were in actual slavery, or who had but just emerged from it.
But these instances cannot make us forget the cruel contempt
and barbarity of which the slave was still the victim, and
which was to be his lot for many generations yet to run. And
therefore the improvement in the condition of the slave or of
his poor plebeian brother by the theoretical equality in the
colleges, may be easily exaggerated. In the humblest of these
clubs, the distribution of good fare and money is not according
to the needs of the members, but regulated by their social
and official rank. We cannot feel confident that in social
intercourse the same distinction may not have been coldly
observed. In modern times we often see a readiness to accord
an equality of material enjoyment, along with a stiff guardianship
of social distinctions which are often microscopic to
the detached observer. And it would not be surprising to
discover that the <q>master</q> or the <q>mother</q> of the college of
Antinous protected their dignity by an icy reserve at its
festive meetings.
</p>

<p>
The question has been raised whether the ordinary colleges
were in any sense charitable institutions for mutual help. And
certainly the inscriptions are singularly wanting in records of
bequests made directly for the relief of poverty, for widows and
orphans or the sick. The donations or bequests of rich patrons
seem to have had chiefly two objects in view, the commemoration
of the dead and the provision for social and convivial enjoyment.
It is true that, just as in municipal feasts, there is often a distribution
of money among the members of colleges. But this
appears to be deprived of an eleemosynary character by the
fact that by far the largest shares are assigned to those who
were presumably the least in need of them. Yet it is to be
recollected that we probably have left to us the memorial of
only a small proportion of these gifts, and that, if we had a full
list of all the benefactions bequeathed to some of the colleges,
the total amount received by each member in the year might
be very considerable, if judged by the standard of ordinary
plebeian incomes. To the ambitious slave any addition, however
small, to his growing <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi>, which might enable him
to buy his freedom, would certainly be grateful.
</p>

<p>
There is one class of colleges, however, which were
un<pb n="283"/><anchor id="Pg283"/>doubtedly formed to meet various exigencies in the course of
life, as well as to make a provision for decent burial. These
are the military clubs, on the objects and constitution of which
a flood of light has been thrown by the study of the inscriptions
in the great legionary camps of North Africa.<note place="foot">Cagnat, <hi rend="italic">L’Armée Rom.</hi> pp. 457 sqq.</note> A passage
of Vegetius shows us the provident arrangement made by
government for the future of the ordinary legionary.<note place="foot">Veget. ii. 20.</note> It is
well known that, on the accession of each new emperor, or
on the occurrence of some interesting event in the history of
the prince’s family, or of some great military success, and often
without any particular justification, a donative was distributed
throughout the army. It sometimes reached a considerable
amount, ranging from the 25 <hi rend="italic">denarii</hi> granted by Vespasian,
to the 5000 of M. Aurelius.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 65. 22; Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi>
c. 7; D. Cass. 73. 8; Cagnat, p. 459;
Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> ii. pp. 136, 543.</note> One half of this largess was
by orders set aside, and retained under the custody of the
standard-bearers, to provide a pension on the soldier’s retirement
from the service. Another fund, entirely different, was
formed by the soldiers’ own contributions, to furnish a decent
burial for those who died on service. But the law against
the formation of colleges fell with peculiar severity on the
soldier.<note place="foot">Cf. Marcian ap. Momms. <hi rend="italic">De Coll.</hi>
p. 87, neve milites collegia in castris
habeant.</note> Not even for a religious purpose was he permitted
to join such a society. This prohibition, however, seems to
have been relaxed in the case of the officers, and some of the
more highly skilled corps.<note place="foot">Cagnat, p. 463.</note> And we have among the inscriptions
of Lambaesis a few instructive records of these military
colleges.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2552-7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lambaesis, as we have seen, was one of those camps which
developed into a regular municipality, after the recognition of
soldiers’ marriages by Septimius Severus. Henceforth the
camp became only a place of drill and exercise, and ceased to
be the soldier’s home. And on the ground where the soldiers’
huts used to stand, there are left the remains of a number of
buildings of the basilica shape, erected probably in the third
century, which were the club-houses of the officers of the Tertia
Augusta. The interior was adorned with statues of imperial
personages, and on the wall was inscribed the law of the college,
<pb n="284"/><anchor id="Pg284"/>commencing with an expression of gratitude for the very
liberal pay which enabled the college to make provision for
the future of its members.<note place="foot">Cagnat, pp. 467, 540; cf.
    <anchor id="corr284"/><corr sic="Boissier">Boissier,</corr>
<hi rend="italic">L’Afr. Rom.</hi> p. 111. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2554,
optiones scholam suam cum statuis et
imaginibus domus div. ex largissimis
stipendiis ... fecerunt, etc.</note> The provision was made in various
ways. An ambitious young officer was allowed a liberal
viaticum for a journey across the sea to seek promotion. If
promotion came, he received another grant to equip him. One
half the amount granted in these cases was mercifully paid to
him in the unpleasant contingency of his losing his grade. If
he died on active service, his heir received a payment on the
larger scale. And, when a man, in due course, retired from
the army, he received the same sum under the name of
<hi rend="italic">anularium</hi>, which has puzzled the antiquary.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2552, 3, 4; 2557, iii.
3524; <hi rend="italic">Henz.</hi> 6790; Cagnat, p. 472;
Marq. <hi rend="italic">Röm. St.</hi> ii. 544.</note>
</p>

<p>
It has been maintained that these military clubs were
really and primarily funerary societies.<note place="foot">Cagnat, p. 474.</note> And provision for
burial was certainly one of their objects. Yet, on a reading
of the law of the society of the <hi rend="italic">Cornicines</hi>, it may be doubted
whether the subject of burial is more prominent than the
other contingencies of the officer’s life, and in some of the
inscriptions, burial is not even alluded to. The grant on
retirement or promotion, and the grant to his heir on the
death of a member, are the same. But probably the majority
of officers had the good fortune to carry the money with
them into peaceful retirement, if not into higher rank in
another corps. In this case they would probably join another
college, whether of soldiers or veterans, and secure once more
the all-important object of a decent and pious interment.
The military clubs seem rather intended to furnish an insurance
against the principal risks and occasions of expenditure
in a soldier’s career. A calculation shows that, after providing
for all these liabilities, the military college must have had a
considerable surplus.<note place="foot">The Cornicines of the 3rd Legion
at Lambesi paid an entrance fee of 750
denarii (<hi rend="italic">Scamnari nomine</hi>). The anularium
on retirement, and the funeraticium,
were each 500 <hi rend="italic">denarii</hi>. It would
seem that there must have been a considerable
surplus. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2557.</note> How it was spent, it is not hazardous
to conjecture. If the poor freedmen and slaves at Ostia
or Lanuvium could afford their modest meals, with a fair
allowance of good wine, drunk to the memory of a generous
<pb n="285"/><anchor id="Pg285"/>benefactor, we may be sure that the college of the <hi rend="italic">Cornicines</hi>
at Lambesi would relieve the tedium of the camp by many
a pleasant mess dinner, and that they would have been
astonished and amused on such occasions to hear themselves
described merely as a burial society.
</p>

<p>
The foundation law of the college of Diana and Antinous
betrays some anxiety lest the continuity of the society should
be broken. And in many a bequest, the greatest care is taken
to prevent malversation or the diversion of the funds from
their original purpose.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6086, universi consentire
debemus ut longo tempore inveterescere
possimus; cf. 4357, 4360, 4366, 4386,
4395.</note> We feel a certain pathetic curiosity,
in reading these records of a futile effort to prolong the
memory of obscure lives, to know how long the brotherhoods
continued their meetings, or when the stated offerings of wine
and flowers ceased to be made. In one case the curiosity is
satisfied and we have before our eyes the formal record of the
extinction of a college. It is contained in a pair of wooden
tablets found in some quarry pits near Alburnus, a remote
village of Dacia. The document was drawn up, as the names
of the consuls show, in the year 167, the year following the
fierce irruption of the Quadi and Marcomanni into Dacia,
Pannonia, and Noricum, in which Alburnus was given to the
flames.<note place="foot">The diptych, which has been singularly
preserved, was found in a deserted
mine or quarry about 1780, along with
some other private documents of a
commercial character; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii.
p. 213, and 921. The dates range from
131 to 167 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6087;
Schiller, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. der röm. Kaiserzeit</hi>, i.
2, p. 643.</note> Artemidorus the slave of Apollonius, and Master of
the college of Jupiter Cernenius, along with the two quaestors,
places it on record, with the attestation of seven witnesses,
that the college has ceased to exist. Out of a membership of
fifty-four, only seventeen remain. The colleague of Artemidorus
in the mastership has never set foot in Alburnus since
his election. The accounts have been wound up, and no balance
is left in the chest. For a long time no member has attended
on the days fixed for meetings, and, as a matter of course, no
subscriptions have been paid. All this is expressed in the
rudest, most ungrammatical Latin, and Artemidorus quaintly
concludes by saying, that, if a member has just died, he must
not imagine that he has any longer a college or any claim to
funeral payments! The humble brothers of the society, whom
<pb n="286"/><anchor id="Pg286"/>Artemidorus reproaches for their faithless negligence, may
probably have fled to some refuge when their masters’ lands
were devastated by the Marcomanni, or been swept on in the
fierce torrent of invaders which finally broke upon the walls of
Aquileia.
</p>

</div></div><div type="book" n="3" rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="287"/><anchor id="Pg287"/>
<index index="toc" level1="Book III. Nec philosophia sine virtute est nec sine philosophia virtus"/><index index="pdf" level1="Book III. Nec philosophia sine virtute est nec sine philosophia virtus"/>
<head>BOOK III.</head>

<head type="sub"><hi rend="italic">NEC PHILOSOPHIA SINE VIRTUTE EST NEC SINE
PHILOSOPHIA VIRTUS</hi></head>

<pb n="288"/><anchor id="Pg288"/>
    
    <div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="I. The philosophic director"/><index index="pdf" level1="I. The philosophic director"/>
<pb n="289"/><anchor id="Pg289"/>

<head>CHAPTER I</head>

<head type="sub">THE PHILOSOPHIC DIRECTOR</head>

<p>
Philosophy in the time of Seneca was a very different thing
from the great cosmic systems of Ionia and Magna Graecia,
or even from the system of the older Stoicism. Speculative
interest had long before his time given way to the study of
moral problems with a definite practical aim. If the stimulus
of the searching method of Socrates gave an impetus for a
century to abstract speculation, it had an even more decided
and long-lived influence in diverting thought to moral questions
from the old ambitious paths. His disciples Antisthenes
and Aristippus prepared the way for the Stoic and Epicurean
schools which dominated the Roman world in the last century
of the Republic and the first of the Empire. And even Plato
and Aristotle indirectly helped forward the movement. It is
not merely that, for both these great spirits, the cultivation of
character and the reform of society have a profound interest.
But even in their metaphysics, they were paving the way for
the more introspective and practical turn which was taken by
post-Aristotelian philosophy, by giving to what were mere
conceptions of the mind a more real existence than to the
things of sense.<note place="foot">See Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1,
13, 14, Jener dualistische Idealismus,
welchen Plato begründet, und auch
Aristoteles nicht grundsätzlich überwunden
hatte, <anchor id="corr289"/><corr sic="fuhrt">führt</corr> in letzter Beziehung
auf nichts anderes zurück, als
auf den Gegensatz des Inneren und
Aeusseren des Denkens und der gegenständlichen
Welt.... Es war nur ein
Schritt weiter in dieser Richtung, wenn
die nacharistotelische Philosophie den
Menschen in grundsätzlicher Abkehr
von der Aussenwelt auf sich selbst
wies, um in seinem Innern die Befriedigung
zu suchen, etc.</note> The <q>ideas</q> or <q>forms</q> which they contrast
with the world of concrete things, are really creations of the
individual mind of which the reality must be sought in the
<pb n="290"/><anchor id="Pg290"/>depths of consciousness, however they may be divinised and
elevated to some transcendental region beyond the limits of
sense and time. With Aristotle, as with Plato, in the last
resort, the higher reason is the true essence of man, coming
into the body from a diviner world, and capable of lifting
itself to the ideal from the cramping limitations of sensuous
life. The philosopher in the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> who turns his gaze
persistently from the confusing phantasmagoria of the senses
to that realm of real existence, eternal and immutable, of
which he has once had a vision, is really the distant progenitor
of the sage of Stoicism, who cuts himself off from the external
objects of desire, to find within a higher law, and the peace
which springs from a life in harmony with the Reason of the
world.
</p>

<p>
The ancient schools, if they maintained a formal individuality
even to the days of Justinian,<note place="foot">See Luc. <hi rend="italic">Eun.</hi> c. 3,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">συντέτακται ἐκ βασιλέως μισθοφορά τις οὐ φαύλη κατὰ γένη τοῖς φιλοσόφοις,
    Στοϊκοῖς λέγω, κτλ.</foreign>
Cf. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. 3; Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Apoll.</hi> T. i. 7, § 8.</note> had worked themselves
out. A host of scholarchs, from all the cities of the Greek
East, failed to break fresh ground, and were content to guard
the most precious or the least vulnerable parts of an ancient
tradition. Moreover, the scrutiny of the long course of speculation,
issuing in such various conclusions, with no criterion
to decide between their claims, gave birth to a scepticism
which sheltered itself even under the great name of the
Academy. And as the faith in the truth of systems dwindled,
the marks of demarcation between them faded; men were less
inclined to dogmatise, and began to select and combine
elements from long discordant schools. In this movement the
eclectic and the sceptic had very much the same object in view—the
support and culture of the individual moral life.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii, 1, 16.</note> The
sceptic sought his ideal in restrained suspense of judgment
and in moral calm. The eclectic, without regard to speculative
consistency, and with only a secondary interest in speculation,
sought for doctrines from any quarter which provided a basis
for the moral life, and, in the conflict of systems on the deeper
questions, would fall back, like Cicero, on intuition and the
consent of consciousness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 493-5; Überweg, <hi rend="italic">Hist. of Phil.</hi>
i. 220; Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Nat. Deor.</hi> i. c. 17; <hi rend="italic">De
Fin.</hi> i. c. 9.</note> Creative power in philosophy was
no more. Speculative curiosity, as pictured in the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> or
<pb n="291"/><anchor id="Pg291"/>the <hi rend="italic">Theaetetus</hi>, had lost its keenness. The imperious craving
was for some guide of life, some medicine for the deeply-felt
maladies of the soul.
</p>

<p>
The extinction of the free civic life of Greece, the conquests
of Macedon, the foundation of the world-wide empire of Rome,
had wrought a momentous moral change. In the old city-state,
religion, morals, and political duty were linked in a
gracious unity and harmony. The citizen drew moral support
and inspiration from ancestral laws and institutions clothed
with almost divine authority. Even Plato does not break
away from the old trammels, but requires the elders of his
Utopia as a duty, after they have seen the vision of God,
to descend again to the ordinary tasks of government. But
when the corporate life which supplied such vivid interests
and moral support was wrecked, the individual was thrown
back upon himself. Morals were finally separated from
politics. Henceforth the great problem of philosophy was
how to make character self-sufficing and independent; how to
find the beatitude of man in the autonomous will, fenced
against all assaults of chance and change.<note place="foot">Bussell, <hi rend="italic">School of Plato</hi>, p. 264; Zeller, iii. 1; p. 8, 9.</note> At the same
time, the foundation of great monarchies, Macedonian or Roman,
embracing many tribes and races and submerging old civic or
national barriers, brought into clearer light the idea of a universal
commonwealth, and placed morals on the broad foundation
of a common human nature and universal brotherhood.
The mundane city of old days, which absorbed, perhaps too
completely, the moral life and conscience of her sons, has
vanished for ever. And in its place and over its ruins has
risen an all-embracing power which seems to have all the
sweep of an impersonal force of nature, though it is sometimes
impelled by one wild, lawless will. If, in return for the loss
of civic freedom, ambitious and patriotic energy, or pride of
civic life, it has given to its subjects a marvellous peace and
order and culture, have not the mass of men become grosser
and more materialised? If there is greater material well-being
and better administration, have not the moral tone and
ideal, in the lack of stimulus, been lowered? Has not vice
become more shameless, and the greed for all things pleasant
grown harder and more cruel? Are not the mass of men
<pb n="292"/><anchor id="Pg292"/>hopelessly and wearily wandering in a tangled maze without
a clue?<note place="foot">On pessimism in the reign of
Augustus, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p.
241. Cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi>
i. 10; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> 20, 22; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii.
37; Petron. 88.</note>
</p>

<p>
With such questionings ringing in his inner ear, the man
with some lingering instinct of goodness might well crave,
beyond anything else, for an inner law of life which should
bring order into the chaos of his conduct and desires.<note place="foot">Cf. Epict. iii. 13, §§ 9, 10, where the
contrast between the <q>pax Romana</q>
and moral unrest is drawn.</note> And
philosophy, having in magnificent effort failed to scale the
virgin heights, fell back on conduct, which seemed then, even
more than to a lost teacher of our youth, <q>three-fourths of
life.</q> The great science which, in the glory and fresh vigour
of the Hellenic prime, aspired to embrace all existence and all
knowledge, to penetrate the secret of the universe and God,
by general consent narrowed its efforts to relieve the struggles
of this transient life set <q>between two eternities.</q> The
human spirit, weary of the fruitless quest of an ever-vanishing
ideal of knowledge, took up the humbler task of solving the
ever-recurring problem of human happiness and conduct.
Henceforth, in spite of traditional dialectic discordance, all the
schools, Stoic or Epicurean, Sceptic or Eclectic, are seeking for
the secret of inner peace, and are singularly unanimous in their
report of the discovery.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 1, pp. 12, 14, cf. Baur,
<hi rend="italic">Ch. Hist.</hi> i. p. 14 (Tr.).</note> The inner life of the spirit becomes
all in all. Speculation and political activity are equally unimportant
to the true life of the soul. Calm equipoise of the
inner nature, undisturbed by the changes of fortunes or the
solicitations of desire, is the ideal of all, under whatever difference
of phrase. What has he to do with any single state who
realises his citizenship in the great commonwealth of man? If
the secret of peace cannot be won by launching in adventurous
thought into the Infinite, perchance it may be found in discipline
of the rebellious will. Philosophy, then, must become the guide
of life, the healer of spiritual maladies.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi> iii 3, est profecto animi
medicina philosophia, Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 22,
vena tangenda est; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 53, Epict. iii.
23, § 30,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἰατρεῖόν ἐστι τὸ τοῦ φιλοσόφου σχολεῖον</foreign>.</note> It must teach the
whole duty of man, to the gods, to the state, to parents and
elders, to women and to slaves. It must attempt the harder
task of bringing some principle of order into the turmoil of
<pb n="293"/><anchor id="Pg293"/>emotion and passion: it must teach us, amid the keen claims
of competing objects of desire, to distinguish the true from the
false, the permanent from the fleeting.
</p>

<p>
The moral reformer cannot indeed dispense with theory and
a ground of general principles,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 94, § 5, § 22.</note> but he will not forget that his
main business is to impart the <hi rend="italic">ars vivendi</hi>; he will be more occupied
with rules which may be immediately applied in practice,
than with the theory of morals. A profound acquaintance with
the pathology of the soul, minute study of the weaknesses of
character, long experience of the devices for counteracting
them, will be worth far more than an encyclopædic knowledge
of centuries of speculation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 64, § 8.</note> He will not undervalue the moral
discourse, with the practical object of turning souls from their
evil ways; but he has only contempt for the rhetoric of the
class-room which desecrates solemn themes by the vanities of
phrase-making.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Rect. Rat. Aud.</hi> c. 8; Epict.
iii. 23, § 23.</note> The best and most fruitful work of practical
philosophy is done by private counsel, adapted to the special
needs of the spiritual patient. He must be encouraged to
make a full confession of the diseases of his soul.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Rect. Rat. Aud.</hi> c. 12.</note> He must
be trained in daily self-examination, to observe any signs of
moral growth or of backsliding. He must be checked when
over confident, and cheered in discouragement. He must have
his enthusiasm kindled by appropriate examples of those who
have trodden the same path and reached the heights.<note place="foot">Plut. (?) <hi rend="italic">De Lib. Ed.</hi> c. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
This serious aim of philosophy commended itself to the
intensely practical and strenuous spirit of the Romans. And
although there were plenty of showy lecturers or preachers in
the first century who could draw fashionable audiences, the
private philosophic director was a far more real power. The
triumph of Aemilius Paulus brought numbers of Greek exiles
to Italy, many of whom found a home as teachers in Roman
families.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, 487;
Plut. <hi rend="italic">Aemil. P.</hi> c. vi.; Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi>
xxxv. 135; Polyb. xxxii. 10. But cf.
Mahaffy on Zeller’s view, in <hi rend="italic">Greek
World under Roman Sway</hi>, p. 67.</note> Panaetius, who revolutionised Stoicism, and made
it a working system, profoundly influenced the circle of Scipio
Aemilianus, in whose house he lived. Great generals and
leaders of the last age of the Republic, a Lucullus or a Pompey,
often carried philosophers in their train. From Augustus to
<pb n="294"/><anchor id="Pg294"/>Elagabalus we hear of their presence at the imperial court.
The wife of Augustus sought consolation on the death of Drusus
from Areus, her husband’s philosophic director.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> 4.</note> Many of these
men indeed did not take their profession very seriously, and in
too many cases they were mere flatterers and parasites whom the
rich patron hired from ostentation and treated with contumely.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Merc. Cond.</hi> 2, 4, 25.</note>
Both Nero and Hadrian used to amuse themselves with the
quarrels and vanity of their philosophers.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 16, etiam sapientiae
doctoribus tempus impertiebat post
epulas, utque contraria adseverantium
discordia frueretur; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 15.</note> But in the terror
of the Claudian Caesars, the Stoic director is often seen performing
his proper part. Julius Canus, when ordered to execution
by Caligula, had his philosopher by his side, with whom he discussed
till the last fatal moment the future of the soul.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> xiv. § 7.</note> The
officer who brought the sentence of death to Thrasea found him
absorbed in conversation with the Cynic Demetrius on the
mystery which the lancet was in a few moments to resolve.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
Of this great movement to cultivate a moral life in paganism
L. Annaeus Seneca was not the least illustrious representative.
Musonius, his younger contemporary, and Epictetus, the pupil
of Musonius, were engaged in the same cure of souls, and
taught practically the same philosophic gospel. They equally
paid but slight attention to the logic and physics of the older
schools.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 1, 656, 663.</note> Virtue, to all of them, is the one great end of philosophic
effort. They were all deeply impressed by the spiritual
wants of the time,<note place="foot">Epict. iii. 23, §§ 24-34; i. 4, § 9,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὗτος, φησίν, ἤδη δι’ αὐτοῦ δύναται Χρύσιππον ἀναγιγνώσκειν.
Εὖ, νὴ τοὺς θεούς, προκόπτεις ἄνθρωπε. Ποίαν προκοπήν;</foreign></note> and they all felt that men needed not
subtleties of disquisition or rhetorical display, but direct, personal
teaching which appealed to the conscience. To all of them
the philosopher is a physician of souls. Musonius and Epictetus
were probably loftier and more blameless characters than
Seneca. Epictetus especially, from the range and simple
attractiveness of his teaching, might seem to many a better representative
of the philosophic director than Seneca. Seneca,
as the wealthy minister of Nero, excites a repugnance in some
minds, which prevents them doing justice to his unquestionable
power and fascination. His apparent inconsistency has
<pb n="295"/><anchor id="Pg295"/>condemned him in the eyes of an age which professes to believe
in the teaching of the Mount, and idolises grandiose wealth
and power. His rhetoric offends a taste that can tolerate and
applaud verbose banalities, with little trace of redeeming art.
He cannot always win the hearing accorded to the repentant
sinner, whose dark experience may make his message more
real and pungent. The historian, however, must put aside
these rather pharisaic prejudices, and give Seneca the position
as a moral teacher which his writings have won in ages not
less earnest than ours. Nor need we fear to recognise a power
which led the early Fathers to trace the spiritual vision of
Seneca to an intercourse with S. Paul,<note place="foot">Tertull. <hi rend="italic">De An.</hi> c. 20, Seneca saepe
noster; S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Adv. Jovin.</hi> i.
49.</note> supported by a feigned
correspondence which imposed on S. Augustine and S. Jerome.<note place="foot">S. Hieron, <hi rend="italic">Adv. Jovin.</hi> i. 29; <hi rend="italic">De
Scrip. Eccl.</hi> 12; S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 153, cujus
etiam ad Paulum apostolum leguntur
epistolae.</note>
The man who approaches Seneca thinking only of scandals
gleaned from Tacitus and Dion Cassius,<note place="foot">The worst about Seneca is collected
in D. Cass. 61. 10. But cf. the attack
of P. Suillius, Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 42 and
xiv. 52.</note> and frozen by a criticism
which cannot feel the power of genius, spiritual imagination, and
a profound moral experience, behind a rhetoric sometimes forced
and extravagant, had better leave him alone. The Christianity
of the twentieth century might well hail with delight the
advent of such a preacher, and would certainly forget all the
accusations of prurient gossip in the accession of an immense
and fascinating spiritual force. The man with any historical
imagination must be struck with amazement that such spiritual
detachment, such lofty moral ideals, so pure an enthusiasm for
the salvation of souls, should emerge from a palace reeking
with all the crimes of the haunted races of Greek legend.
That the courtier of the reigns of Caligula and Claudius, the
tutor and minister of Nero, should not have escaped some
stains may be probable: that such a man should have composed
the Letters and the <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi> of Seneca is almost a miracle. Yet
the glow of earnestness and conviction, the intimate knowledge
of the last secrets of guilty souls, may well have been the
reward of such an ordeal.
</p>

<p>
Seneca’s career, given a latent fund of moral enthusiasm,
was really a splendid preparation for his mission, as an analyst
of a corrupt society and a guide to moral reform. He lived
<pb n="296"/><anchor id="Pg296"/>through the gloomiest years of the imperial tyranny; he had
been in the thick of its intrigues, and privy to its darkest
secrets; he had enjoyed its favour, and knew the perils of
its jealousy and suspicion. He came as an infant from
Cordova to Rome in the last years of Augustus.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> xix. § 2.</note> In spite of
weak health, he was an ardent student of all the science and
philosophy of the time, and he fell under the influence of
Sotion, a member of the Sextian School, which combined a
rigorous Stoicism with Pythagorean rules of life.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, §§ 13-17.</note> As a young
advocate and prosperous official, he passed unharmed through
the terror and ghastly rumours of the closing years of Tiberius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 22. He abandoned
Pythagorean abstinence, as suspicious,
during the persecution of eastern cults;
cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 36.</note>
His eloquence in the Senate excited the jealousy of Caligula,
and he narrowly escaped the penalty.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 59. 19.</note> In the reign of Claudius
he must have been one of the inner circle of the court, for his
banishment, at the instance of Messalina, for eight years to
Corsica was the penalty of a supposed intrigue with Julia, the
niece of the emperor.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 60. 8; 61. 10; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii.
42, schol. Juv. v. 109.</note> Seneca knew how to bend to the storm,
and, by the influence of Agrippina, he was recalled to be the
tutor of the young Nero, and on his accession four years afterwards,
became his first minister by the side of Burrus.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 61. 4; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 2.
Dion suggests an intrigue with Agrippina,
61. 10.</note> The
famous <hi rend="italic">quinquennium</hi>, an oasis in the desert of despotism, was
probably the happiest period of Seneca’s life. In spite of some
misgivings, the dream of an earthly Providence, as merciful as it
was strong, seemed to be realised.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 5, 8.</note> But it was, after all, a giddy
and anxious elevation, and the influence of Seneca was only
maintained by politic concessions, and was constantly threatened
by the daemonic ambition of Agrippina.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 2, quo facilius
... voluptatibus concessis retinerent,
etc.</note> And Seneca had
enemies like P. Suillius, jealous of his power and his millions,
and eagerly pointing to the hypocrisy of the Stoic preacher,
whom gossip branded as an adulterer and a usurer.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiii. 42; D. Cass. 61. 10.</note> The
death of Burrus gave the last shock to his power.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 52, mors Burri
infregit Senecae potentiam, etc.</note> His
enemies poured in to the assault. The emperor had long
wished to shake off the incubus of a superior spirit; and the
<pb n="297"/><anchor id="Pg297"/>riches, the pointed eloquence, and more pointed sarcasms, the
gardens and villas and lordly state of the great minister, suggested
a possible aspirant to the principate. Seneca acted on
his principles and offered to give up everything.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 54.</note> But his
torture was to be prolonged, and his doom deferred for about
two years. His release came in the fierce vengeance for the
Pisonian conspiracy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xv. 56 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Seneca was an ideal director for the upper class of such an
age. He had risen to the highest office in a world-wide
monarchy, and he had spent years in hourly fear of death.
He had enjoyed the society of the most brilliant circles, and
exchanged epigrams and repartees with the best; he had also
seen them steeped in debauchery and treachery, and terror-stricken
in base compliance. He had witnessed their fantastic
efforts of luxury and self-indulgence, and heard the tale of
wearied sensualism and disordered ambition and ineffectual
lives.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 55; <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> 1 and 2.</note> His disciples were drawn, if not from the noblest class,
at any rate from the class which had felt the disillusionment
of wealth and fashion and power. And the vicissitudes in his
own fate and character made him a powerful and sympathetic
adviser. He had long to endure the torturing contrast of
splendid rank and wealth, with the brooding terror of a doom
which might sweep down at any moment. He was also tortured
by other contrasts, some drawn by the fierceness of envious
hatred, others perhaps acknowledged by conscience. Steeped in
the doctrines of Chrysippus and Pythagoras, he had subdued
the ebullient passions of youth by a more than monastic asceticism.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, §§ 17-22.</note>
He had passionately adopted an ethical creed which
aimed at a radical reform of human nature, at the triumph of
cultivated and moralised reason and social sympathy over the
brutal materialism and selfishness of the age. He had pondered
on its doctrines of the higher life, of the nothingness of the
things of sense, on death, and the indwelling God assisting
the struggling soul, on the final happy release from all the
sordid misery and terror, until every earthly pleasure and
ambition faded away in the presence of a glorious moral ideal.<note place="foot">Cf. Baur, <hi rend="italic">Ch. Hist.</hi> i. p. 16 (Tr.).</note>
And yet this pagan monk, this idealist, who would have been
at home with S. Jerome or Thomas à Kempis, had accumulated
<pb n="298"/><anchor id="Pg298"/>a vast fortune, and lived in a palace which excited the envy
of a Nero. He was suspected of having been the lover of two
princesses of the imperial house.<note place="foot">D. Cass. 61. 10.</note> He was charged with having
connived at, or encouraged the excesses of Nero, and even of
having been an accomplice in the murder of Agrippina, or its
apologist.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 13; xiv. 7; and
11, sed Seneca adverso rumore erat,
quod oratione tali confessionem scripsisset.</note> Some of these rumours are probably false, the work
of prurient imaginations in the most abandoned age in history.
Yet there are traces in Seneca’s writings that he had not
passed unscathed through the terrible ordeal to which character
was exposed in that age. There are pictures of voluptuous
ease and jaded satiety which may be the work of a keen sympathetic
observation, but which may also be the expression of
repentant memory.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77, § 16, ecquid habes
propter quod expectes? Voluptates ipsas
quae te morantur consumpsisti....
Nihil tibi luxuria tua in futuros annos
reservavit intactum: cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 21;
90, § 42.</note> In any case, he had sounded the very
depths of the moral abysses of his time. He had no illusions
about the actual condition of human nature. The mass of
men, all but a few naturally saintly souls, were abandoned to
lust or greed or selfish ambition. Human life was an obscene
and cruel struggle of wild beasts for the doles flung by fortune
into the arena.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8.</note> The peace and happiness of the early Eden
have departed for ever, leaving men to the restlessness of
exhausted appetite, or to the half-repentant sense of impotent
lives, spent in pursuing the phantoms of imaginary pleasure,
with broken glimpses now and then of a world for ever lost.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, §§ 38-41.</note>
With such a scene about him in his declining years, whatever
his own practice may have been, Seneca came to feel an
evangelistic passion, almost approaching S. Paul’s, to open to
these sick perishing souls the vision of a higher life through
the practical discipline of philosophy.
</p>

<p>
The tendency to regard the true function of philosophy as
purely ethical, reforming, guiding and sustaining character and
conduct, finds its most emphatic expression in Seneca. He is
far more a preacher, a spiritual director, than a thinker, and he
would have proudly owned it. His highest, nay, one may
almost say his only aim, is, in our modern phrase, to which
his own sometimes approaches, to save souls. Philosophy
<pb n="299"/><anchor id="Pg299"/>in its highest and best sense is not the pursuit of knowledge
for its own sake, nor the disinterested play of intellect,
regardless of intellectual consequences, as in a Platonic
dialogue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 49, § 5, non vaco ad istas
ineptias: ingens negotium in manibus
est; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 75, § 5, non delectent, verba
nostra, sed prosint ... non quaerit
aeger medicum eloquentem; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, §
36, plus scire quam sit satis, intemperantiae
genus est. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 71, § 6.</note> It is pre-eminently the science or the art of right
living, that is of a life conformed to right reason.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 8, nec philosophia sine
virtute est, nec sine philosophia virtus.</note> Its great
end is the production of the <hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi>, the man who sees, in
the light of Eternal Reason, the true proportions of things,
whose affections have been trained to obey the higher law,
whose will has hardened into an unswerving conformity to it,
in all the difficulties of conduct.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 66, § 12.</note> And the true philosopher
is no longer the cold, detached student of intellectual problems,
far removed from the struggles and the miseries of human
life. He has become the <hi rend="italic">generis humani paedagogus</hi>,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 13; 117, §§ 30, 31.</note> the
schoolmaster to bring men to the Ideal Man. In comparison
with that mission, all the sublimity or subtlety of the great
masters of dialectic becomes mere contemptible trifling, as if a
man should lose himself in some game, or in the rapture of
sweet music, with a great conflagration raging before his eyes.
In the universal moral shipwreck, how can one toy with these
old world trifles, while the perishing are stretching out their
hands for help?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 48, § 8; 75, § 6.</note> Not that Seneca despises the inheritance of
ancient wisdom, so far as it has any gospel for humanity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 64, § 3; 58, § 26.</note> He
will accept good moral teaching from any quarter, from Plato
or Epicurus, as readily as from Chrysippus or Panaetius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Vita B.</hi> xiii, where he defends
Epicurus.</note> He
is ready to give almost divine honours to the great teachers
of the human race. But he also feels that no moral teaching
can be final. After a thousand ages, there will still be room
for making some addition to the message of the past. There
will always be a need for fresh adjustments and applications
of the remedies which past wisdom has handed down.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 64, § 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is almost needless to say that Seneca has almost a contempt
for the so-called liberal studies of his day.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, § 37, § 20.</note> There is only
one truly liberal study, that which aims at liberating the will
from the bondage of desire. Granted that it is necessary as a
<pb n="300"/><anchor id="Pg300"/>mental discipline to submit to the grammarian in youth; yet
experience shows that this training does nothing to form the
virtuous character.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, § 2, unum studium vere
liberale est quod liberum facit, etc.</note> Who can respect a man who wastes his
mature years, like Didymus, in inquiries as to the relative
ages of Hecuba or Helen, or the name of the mother of <anchor id="corr300"/><corr sic="Æneas">Aeneas</corr>,
or the character of Anacreon or Sappho?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 39; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88.</note> The man of serious
purpose will rather try to forget these trifles than continue
the study of them. And Seneca treats in the same fashion the
hair-splitting and verbal subtleties of some of the older Stoics.
He acquiesces indeed, in their threefold division of Philosophy
into Logic, Physics, and Ethics; but for the first department
he seems to have but scant respect, though once or twice he
amuses his pupil Lucilius by a disquisition on Genus and
Species, or the Platonic and Aristotelian <q>Causes,</q> in the
style of the Stoic scholasticism.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89; 66, § 33; 58, § 8.</note> Seneca was writing for
posterity; he has his intellectual vanity; and he probably
wished to show that, while he set but little store by such
studies, this was not due to an imperfect knowledge of them.
It is because life is too short, and its great problems are too
urgent, to permit a serious man to spend his precious years in
fruitless intellectual play. He calls on Lucilius to leave such
barren subtleties, which bring the greatest of all themes down
to the level of intellectual jugglery.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 71, § 6, erige te et relinque
istum ludum literarium philosophorum
qui rem magnificam ad syllabas vocant,
etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the department of Physics Seneca has much more
respect, and he evidently devoted much attention to it. We
have traces of some lost works of his on scientific subjects, and
there is still extant a treatise in seven books on <hi rend="italic">Natural
Questions</hi>, which became a handbook of science in the Middle
Ages.<note place="foot">Teuffel, ii. § 284, n. 6; cf. Zeller,
<hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p. 623.</note> It deals with such subjects as we meet with in the
poem of Lucretius, thunder and lightning, winds and earthquakes,
and rising and failing springs. But it has perhaps
less of the scientific spirit than Lucretius, according to our
modern standards. We have abundant reference to old
physical authorities, to Thales, Anaximenes, Anaximander,
Diogenes of Apollonia, to Caecina and Attalus. But
the conception of any scientific method beyond more or
<pb n="301"/><anchor id="Pg301"/>less ingenious hypothesis, or of any scientific verification of
hypothesis, is utterly absent. This is of course a general
characteristic of most of the scientific effort of antiquity. The
truth is that, although Seneca probably had some interest in
natural phenomena, he had a far more profound interest in
human nature and human destiny. The older Stoics, with some
variations, subordinated Physics to Ethics, as of inferior and
only subsidiary importance.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 1, p. 56.</note> Seneca carries this subordination
almost to extremes, although he also is sometimes inconsistent.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 117, § 19; <hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest. Prol.</hi>;
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 65, § 15; cf. Zeller, iii. 1. 622.</note>
He thinks it significant that while the World-Spirit has hidden
gold, the great tempter and corruptor, far beneath our feet, it
has displayed, in mysterious yet pompous splendour, in the
azure canopy above us, the heavenly orbs which are popularly
believed to control our destiny in the material sense, and which
may really govern it, by raising our minds to the contemplation
of an infinite mystery and a marvellous order.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest.</hi> v. 15; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, § 15.</note> To Seneca, as
to Kant, there seems a mystic tie between the starry heavens
above and the moral law within. In the prologue to the <hi rend="italic">Natural
Questions</hi>, indeed, carried away for the moment by the grandeur
of his theme, Seneca seems to exalt the contemplation of the
infinite distances and mysterious depths and majestic order of
the stellar world far above the moral struggles of our mundane
life. The earth shrinks to a mere point in infinitude, an
ant-hill where the human insects mark out their Lilliputian
territories and make their wars and voyages for their lifetime
of an hour.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest. Prol.</hi> § 11, formicarum
iste discursus est in augusto laborantium....
Punctum est istud in quo
navigatis, in quo bellatis; Sursum ingentia
spatia sunt, etc.; cf. Macrob.
<hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 16, § 6.</note> This, however, is rather a piece of rhetoric than a
careful statement of Seneca’s real view. In the Letters, again
and again, we are told that virtue is the one important thing,
that the conquest of passion raises man to be equal to God,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 73, § 13, sic deus non vincit
sapientem felicitate etiamsi vincit
aetate.</note>
and that in the release of the rational or divine part of us
from bondage to the flesh, man recovers a lost liberty, a
primeval dignity. But in this struggle the spirit may refresh
and elevate itself by looking up to the divine world
from which it draws its origin, and to which it may, perchance,
return. To Seneca’s mind the so-called physics really involve
<pb n="302"/><anchor id="Pg302"/>theology and metaphysics. In the contemplation of the vastness
of the material universe, the mind may be aroused to
the urgency and interest of the great questions touching God,
His relation to fate, to the world, and man.<note place="foot">Cf. Pl. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 79 <hi rend="small">D</hi>; Arist. <hi rend="italic">Eth.</hi>
ix 8, § 7.</note> The scientific interest
in Seneca is evidently not the strongest. There are still
indeed the echoes of the old philosophies which sought man’s
true greatness and final beatitude in the clear vision of abstract
truth. But Seneca is travelling rapidly on the way which
leads to another vision of the celestial city, in which emotion,
the passionate yearning for holiness as well as truth, blends
with and tends to overpower the ideal of a passionless eternity
of intellectual intuition. In Seneca’s rapturous outburst on
the gate of deliverance opened by death, making allowance for
difference of associations and beliefs, there is surely a strange
note of kindred sympathy, across the gulf of thirteen centuries,
with Thomas à Kempis.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 102, § 26, dies iste, quem
tanquam extremum reformidas, aeterni
natalis est ... discutietur ista caligo
et lux undique clara percutiet ...
nulla serenum umbra turbabit. Cf.
<hi rend="italic">De Imit.</hi> iii. 48, § 1, O supernae
civitatis mansio beatissima! O dies
aeternitatis clarissima, quam nox non
obscurat, sed summa Veritas semper
irradiat! Lucet quidem Sanctis perpetua
claritate splendida, sed non nisi
a longe et per speculum peregrinantibus
in terra.</note>
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend="italic">Natural Questions</hi> were, as he tells us, the work of his
old age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest.</hi> iii. Praef., non praeterit
me quam magnarum rerum fundamenta
ponam senex.</note> He has a lofty conception of his task, of the importance
of the subject to the right culture of the spirit, and
he summons up all his remaining energy to do it justice.
But the work falls far short, in interest and executive skill,
of a treatise like the <hi rend="italic">De Beneficiis</hi>, and the principle of
edification—<hi rend="italic">omnibus sermonibus aliquid salutare miscendum</hi><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 59, § 2.</note>—is
too obtrusive, and sometimes leads to incongruous and
almost ludicrous effects. A reference to the mullet launches
him on a discourse on luxury.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii, § 18.</note> A discourse on mirrors would
hardly seem to lend itself to moralising. Yet the invention
furnishes to Seneca impressive lessons on self-knowledge, and
a chance of glorifying the simple age when the unkempt
daughter of a Scipio, who received her scanty dowry in
uncoined metal, had never had her vanity aroused by the
reflected image of her charms.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 17, § 8, An tu existimas auro
inditum habuisse Scipionis filias speculum
cum illis dos fuisset aes grave?</note> The subject of lightning
<pb n="303"/><anchor id="Pg303"/>naturally gives occasion to a homily against the fear of death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest.</hi> ii. 59, § 3.</note>
A prologue, on the conflict to be waged with passion and
luxury and chance and change, winds up abruptly with the
invitation—<hi rend="italic">quaeramus ergo de aquis</hi> ... <hi rend="italic">qua ratione fiant</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 1, § 1.</note> The
investigation closes with an imaginative description of the
great cataclysm which is destined to overwhelm in ruin the
present order. The earthquakes in Campania in <sic>66</sic> <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>
naturally furnish many moral lessons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 32.</note> The closing passage of
the <hi rend="italic">Natural Questions</hi> is perhaps the best, and the most worthy
of Seneca. In all these inquiries, he says, into the secrets of
nature, we should proceed with reverent caution and self-distrust,
as men veil their faces and bend in humbleness before
a sacrifice.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 30, § 1.</note> How many an orb, moving in the depths of space,
has never yet risen upon the eyes of man.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 30, § 3, quam multa praeter
hos per secretum eunt nunquam humanis
oculis orientia?</note> The Great Author
Himself is only dimly visible to the inner eye, and there are
vast regions of His universe which are still beyond our ken,
which dazzle us by their effulgence, or elude our gross senses
by their subtle secrecy. We are halting on the threshold of
the great mysteries. There are many things destined to be
revealed to far-distant ages, when our memory shall have
passed away,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 5, multa venientis aevi populus
ignota nobis sciet, multa saeculis
tunc futuris, cum memoria nostra exoleverit,
reservantur.</note> of which our time does not deserve the revelation.
Our energies are spent in discovering fresh ingenuities of
luxury and monstrous vice. No one gives a thought to
philosophy; the schools of ancient wisdom are deserted and
left without a head.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 31.</note> It is in this spirit that Seneca undertook
his mission as a saviour of souls.
</p>

<p>
Seneca, in the epilogue to the <hi rend="italic">Natural Questions</hi>, remarks
sarcastically that, as all human progress is slow, so, even with
all our efforts of self-indulgence, we have not yet reached the
finished perfection of depravity; we are still making discoveries
in vice. In another passage he maintains that his own age is no
worse than others.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> i. 10.</note> But this is only because at all times the mass
of men are bad. Such pessimism in the first and second centuries
was a prevalent tone. We meet it alike in Persius, Petronius,
Martial, and Juvenal, and in Seneca, Tacitus, Pliny, Epictetus,
<pb n="304"/><anchor id="Pg304"/>and Marcus Aurelius.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8, 9; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> ii.
11, 17, 20; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 37; Petron.
<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 88; M. Aurel. v. 33; v. 10.</note> The rage for wealth and luxury, the
frenzy of vice which perverted natural healthy instincts and
violated the last retreats of modesty, the combination of
ostentation and meanness in social life, the cowardice and the
cruelty which are twin offspring of pampered self-indulgence,
the vanity of culture and the vanishing of ideals, the vague
restless ennui, hovering between satiety and passion, between
faint glimpses of goodness and ignominious failure, between fits
of ambition and self-abandoned languor, all these and more had
come under the eye of Seneca as an observer or a director of
souls.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77, § 6; 24, § 25; 89, § 21;
95, § 16; <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. i.</note> It is a lost world that he has before him, trying fruitless
anodynes for its misery, holding out its hands for help from
any quarter.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 48, § 8.</note> The consuming earnestness of Seneca, about which,
in spite of his rhetoric, there can be no mistake, and his endless
iteration are the measure of his feeling as to the gravity of the
case. Seneca is the earliest and most powerful apostle of a
great moral revival. His studied phrase, his epigrammatic
point seem often out of place; his occasionally tinsel rhetoric
sometimes offends a modern taste. We often miss the austere
and simple seriousness of Epictetus, the cultivated serenity and
the calm clear-sighted resignation of Marcus Aurelius. Still let
us admit that here is a man, with all his moral faults which he
freely confesses, with all his rhetoric which was a part of
his very nature, who felt he had a mission, and meant to fulfil
it with all the resources of his mind. He is one of the
few heathen moralists who warm moral teaching with the
emotion of modern religion, and touch it with the sadness
and the yearning which spring from a consciousness of man’s
infinite capacities and his actual degradation; one in whose
eyes can be seen the <hi rend="italic">amor ulterioris ripae</hi>, in whose teaching
there are searching precepts which go to the roots of conduct,
and are true for all ages of our race. He adheres formally to
the lines of the old Stoic system in his moments of calm
logical consistency. But when the enthusiasm of humanity, the
passion to win souls to goodness and moral truth is upon him,
all the old philosophical differences fade, the new wine bursts
the old bottles; the Platonic dualism, the eternal conflict of
<pb n="305"/><anchor id="Pg305"/>flesh and spirit,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 71, § 27; 94, § 50; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi>
24, § 5; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 79, § 12, tunc animus
noster habebit quod gratuletur sibi,
cum emissus his tenebris, in quibus
volutatur, non tenui visu clara perspexerit
... et caelo redditus suo
fuerit; Zeller, iii. i. 637.</note> the Platonic vision of God, nay, a higher
vision of the Creator, the pitiful and loving Guardian, the Giver
of all good, the Power which draws us to Himself, who receives
us at death, and in whom is our eternal beatitude, these
ideas, so alien to the older Stoicism, transfigure its hardness,
and its cold, repellent moral idealism becomes a religion.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 79, § 12; 102, § 22, per has
mortalis aevi moras illi meliori vitae
longiorique proluditur, §§ 26, 28; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
73, § 15, Deus ad homines venit, etc.
But cf. Zeller, iii. 1, 650; and for a
different view, <anchor id="corr305"/><corr sic="Burgmann.">Burgmann,</corr> <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s
Theologie in ihrem Verhältn. zum
Stoicismus</hi>, etc. pp. 20-32. That Burgmann’s
is the truer view appears from
Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 49; 65, § 9; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi>
i. 5, § 7; <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> ii. 29, § 4; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi>
v. 10; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 28, § 1; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 41, §
    <anchor id="corr305-2"/><corr sic="2">2.</corr></note>
Seneca’s system is really a religion; it is morality inspired by
belief in a spiritual world and <q>touched by emotion.</q> In a
remarkable letter, he discusses the question whether, for the
conduct of life, precept is sufficient without dogma, whether
a man can govern his life by empirical rules, without a
foundation of general principles. Can a religion dispense with
dogma?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 10.</note> Seneca, as a casuist and spiritual director, was not
likely to undervalue the importance of definite precept, adapted
to the circumstances of the case. The philosopher, who was
a regular official in great families, probably dealt chiefly in
precept, on a basis of authority concealed and rarely scrutinised.
But Seneca is not an ordinary professional director. He has
a serious purpose; he feels that he is dealing with the
most momentous of all problems—how to form or reform a life,
with a view to its true end, how the final good of man is to
be realised only in virtuous action. But action will not be right
and virtuous unless the will be also right, and rightness of will
depends on ordered habit of the soul,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 57, rursus voluntas non erit
recta nisi habitus animi rectus fuerit,
etc.</note> and that again springs
from right general principles or dogmas. In other words, a true
theory of conduct is necessary to virtue in the highest sense.
Mere imperative precept and rule cannot give steadiness and
continuity to conduct. The motive, the clear perception of the
guiding principle, can alone dignify an act with a peculiar moral
distinction. In order to possess that character, the external
act must be rooted in a faith in the rational law of conduct.
Particular precepts may produce an external obedience to
<pb n="306"/><anchor id="Pg306"/>that law, but they cannot give the uniformity and certainty of
the inner light and the regulated will.
</p>

<p>
Seneca is not a sectarian dogmatist, although he lays so
much stress on the necessity of dogma to virtuous conduct. He
boldly declares that he does not follow absolutely any of
the Stoic doctors. He defends Epicurus against the vulgar
misunderstanding of his theory of pleasure, and the more
vulgar practical deductions from it. He often quotes his
maxims with admiration to Lucilius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Vit. Beat.</hi> xii. § 4, nec aestimant,
voluptas illa Epicuri quam sobria
et sicca sit, sed ad nomen ipsum advolant
quaerentes libidinibus suis patrocinium
aliquod ac velamentum. Cf.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 18, § 14; 16, § 7; 22, § 13; 28,
§ 9.</note> In his views of the
nature of God and His relation to the external world and to
the human soul, Seneca often seems to follow the old Stoic
tradition. There are other passages where he seems to waver
between different conceptions of God, the Creator of the universe,
the incorporeal Reason, the divine breath diffused through all
things, great and small, Fate, or the immutable chain of interlinked
causation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> viii. § 3, quisquis formator
universi fuit, sive ille deus est
potens omnium, sive incorporalis ratio
ingentium operum artifex, sive divinus
spiritus per omnia aequali intentione
diffusus, sive fatum et immutabilis
causarum inter se cohaerentium series.
Cf. <hi rend="italic">N. Quaest.</hi> ii. 45, § 2.</note> It is also clear that, from the tone of his
mind, and the fact that the centre of philosophical interest for
him is the moral life of man, he tends towards a more ethical
conception of the Deity, as the Being who loves and cares for
man. All this may be admitted and will be further noticed
on a later page. Yet Seneca, in strict theory, probably never
became a dissenter from the physical or ontological creed of
his school. He adhered, in the last resort, to the Stoic pantheism,
which represented God and the universe, force and
formless matter, as ultimately issuing from the one substratum
of the ethereal fire of Heraclitus, and in the great cataclysm,
returning again to their source.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 71, § 14.</note> He also held theoretically the
Stoic materialism, and the Stoic principle, that only corporeal
natures can act on one another.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 57, § 8; 66, § 12; 117, § 2.</note> The force which moulds
indeterminate matter into concrete form is spirit, breath, in the
literal sense, interfused in rude matter, and by its tension,
outward and again inward upon itself, producing form and
quality and energy. Mere matter could never mould itself,
or develop from within a power of movement and action. But
<pb n="307"/><anchor id="Pg307"/>this material force which shapes the universe from within is
also rational, and the universe is a rational being, guided by
the indwelling reason to predestined ends, and obedient to
a universal law. The God of the Stoics is thus a very elastic
or comprehensive conception. He may be viewed as the
ubiquitous, impalpable force, which may, in the lack of more
accurate expression, be called air, ether, fire. He is the soul,
the breath, the Anima Mundi. He is also the universal law,
the rational principle, underlying all the apparently casual and
fitful phenomena of physical nature and human life. God
may also surely be regarded as the eternal Fate, the power in
the ruthless, yet merciful sequence of inevitable causation.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, 122;
cf. <hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest.</hi> ii. 45, § 2.</note>
And, in milder and more optimistic moods, we may view Him
as a watchful Providence, caring for men more than they seem
to care for themselves, saving them from the consequences of
their own errors and misdeeds. In Seneca, He develops into
a moral and spiritual Being, the source of all spiritual intuition
and virtuous emotion, the secret power within us making for
righteousness, as He is the secret force in all nature making
for order.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> i. ii. § 6; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 27;
<hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> ii. 29; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 73, § 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
It seems a little crude and superficial to contrast the
materialist and idealist conceptions of God in the later Stoic
creed. What human conception of Him is free from similar
contradictions? How can any conception of Him, expressed
in human language, avoid them? And in Seneca’s conception
of soul, even as material, there is something so thin, so subtle,
and elusive, that the bounds of matter and spirit seem to
melt away and disappear.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 57, § 8, animus qui ex tenuissimo
constat, deprehendi non potest, etc.</note> However loyal he may be in
form to Stoic materialism, Seneca in the end regards God as
no mere material force, however refined and etherealised, but
a spiritual power; not perhaps limited by the bounds of
personality, but instinct with moral tendencies, nay, a moral
impetus, which no mere physical force could ever develop.<note place="foot">Burgmann, <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s Theologie</hi>, p.
41.</note> The
growing dualism in Seneca’s metaphysics is the result of the
growing dualism of his psychology. In accord with the old
Stoic doctors, he sometimes formulates the material nature of
the soul, and its essential unity. It is, like the Anima Mundi,
<pb n="308"/><anchor id="Pg308"/>warm breath or subtle fire, penetrating all parts of the body,
discharging currents from the central heart to the several organs.
It is primarily rational, and all the lower powers of passion are
derived from the controlling and unifying reason. It is a spark
of the universal Spirit, holding the same place in the human
organism as the Divine Spirit does in the universe.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 65, § 24, quem in hoc mundo
deus obtinet, hunc in homine animus.</note> But
experience and reflection drove Seneca more and more into an
acceptance of the Platonic opposition of reason and passion, an
unceasing struggle of the flesh and spirit, in which the old
Stoic theory of the oneness of the rational soul tended to
disappear.<note place="foot">Pl. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 83 <hi rend="small">C, D</hi>; 79 <hi rend="small">B</hi>; <hi rend="small">D</hi>; cf.
Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 183; iii.
2, p. 634; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 71, § 27.</note> This is only one, but it is the most important,
modification of ancient theory forced on Seneca by a closer
application of theory to the facts of human life, and a completer
analysis of them. The individual consciousness, and the
spectacle of human life, alike witness to the inevitable tendency
of human nature to corruption. Even after the great cataclysm,
when a new earth shall arise from the waters of the deluge,
and a new man, in perfect innocence, shall enter on this fair
inheritance, the clouds will soon gather again, and darken
the fair deceitful dawn.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest.</hi> iii. 30, § 8, sed illis
quoque innocentia non durabit—cito
nequitia subrepit.</note> The weary struggle of flesh and
spirit will begin once more, in which the flesh is so often the
victor. For to Seneca, as to the Orphic mystics and to Plato,
the body is a prison, and life one long punishment.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 120, § 14; 65, § 16, nam corpus
hoc animi pondus ac poena est;
premente illo urgetur, in vinculis
est, etc. <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> ix. § 6, omnis vita
supplicium est; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xx. § 2.</note> Such
is the misery of this mortal life, such the danger of hopeless
corruption, that no one would accept the gift of existence if
he could foresee the evil in store for him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 22, § 3.</note> And death, the
object of dread to the blind masses, is really the one compensation
for the calamity of birth, either as a happy return to
antenatal tranquillity, or as the gateway to a glorious freedom
and vision of the Divine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 18, mors nos aut consumit
aut eximit; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 36, § 10;
102, § 23; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> vi. § 6; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi>
25, § 1; <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> 19, § 5; 20, § 2, quae efficit
ut nasci non sit supplicium; cf. Epict.
ii. 1; iii. 10; iii. 13; iv. 1; M. Aurel.
viii. 18; vi. 28; iii. 3; ix. 3.</note> Seneca, indeed, does not always
express himself in this strain. He is often the consistent,
orthodox Stoic, who glories in the rounded perfection of the
<pb n="309"/><anchor id="Pg309"/><hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi>, triumphing, even in this life, over all the seductions
of sense and the fallacies of perverted reason, and, in virtue
of the divine strength within him, making himself, even here
below, equal with God in moral purity and freedom.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 53, § 11, est aliquid quo sapiens
antecedat deum; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 59, § 16,
talis est sapientis animus, qualis mundus
super lunam; semper illic serenum
est; 72, § 8.</note> In such
moods, he will adhere to the Stoic psychology: reason will be
all in all; virtue will be uniform, complete, attained by one
supreme victorious effort. But the vision is constantly crossed
and darkened by doubts which are raised by the terrible facts
of life. The moral problem becomes more difficult and complicated;
the vision of perfection recedes to an infinite distance,
and the glorious deliverance is reserved for an immortal life
of which the older Stoics did not often dream.
</p>

<p>
Still, we can find in Seneca all the Stoic gospel, and
moral idealism. <q>Nil bonum nisi verum</q> is the fundamental
principle. The failures, aberrations, and sins of men arise
from a false conception of what is good, produced by the
warping effect of external things upon the higher principle.
The avaricious, the ambitious, the sensual, live in a vain show.
They are pursuing unreal objects of desire, which cheat and
befool the reason, and turn to ashes when they are won.
The <q>kingdom of Heaven is within.</q> It is the freedom, the
peace, the tranquil sense of power over all that is fortuitous
and external and fleeting, which alone can realise the highest
good of man.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 74, § 1; 62, § 3, brevissima ad
divitias per contemptum divitiarum
via est; 59, § 14.</note> It is attained only by virtue, that is, by living
in obedience to the law of reason, which has its voice and
representative in each human soul. The summons to yield
ourselves to the law of nature and reason simply calls us to
obey our highest part (<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ ἡγεμονικόν</foreign>), which is a steadfast
witness to the eternal truth of things, and, if unbribed and
unperverted, will discern infallibly the right line of conduct
amid all the clamorous or seductive temptations of the flesh or
of the world. Nothing is a real good which has not the
stamp and hall-mark of reason, which is not within the soul
itself, that is within our own power. Everything worth
having or wishing for is within. External things, wealth,
power, high place, the pleasures of sense, are transitory, deceptive,
unstable, the gifts of Fortune, and equally at her
<pb n="310"/><anchor id="Pg310"/>mercy. In the mad struggle for these ephemeral pleasures,
the wise man retires unobserved from the scene of cruel and
sordid rapacity, having secretly within him the greatest prize
of all, which Fortune cannot give or take away.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 74, §§ 6-12; cf. M. Aurel. v.
15,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">νῦν δὲ ὅσῳ περ πλείω τις ἀφαιρῶν ἑαυτοῦ τούτων ἢ καὶ ἀφαιρούμενός τι
τούτων ἀνέχηται, τοσῷδε μᾶλλον ἀγαθός ἐστι</foreign>: Epict. ii. 16, § 18; iii. 3, § 14.</note> If these
things were really good, then God would be less happy than
the slave of lust and ambition, than the sensualist who is fascinated
by a mistress or a minion, the trader who may be ruined
by a storm, the wealthy minister who may at any moment be
ordered to death by a Nero.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 31, § 10; 74, § 14 aut
ista bona non sunt, quae vocantur, aut
homo felicior deo est, etc.</note> The only real liberty and
human dignity are to be found in renunciation. If we
jealously guard and reverence the divine reason within us,
and obey its monitions, which are in truth the voice of God,
the Universal Reason, then we have an impregnable fortress
which cannot be stormed by any adverse fortune. The peace
and freedom so won may be called, although Seneca does not
so call it, the <q>peace of God.</q> For it is in fact the restored
harmony between the human spirit and the Reason of the
world, and the cessation of the weary conflict between the
<q>law in the members</q> and <q>the law of the mind,</q> which
ends so often in that other peace of a <q>mare mortuum,</q> a
stillness of moral death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 67, § 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
The gospel of Seneca, with all its searching power, seems
wanting in some of the essentials of an effective religion which
can work on character. Where, it may be asked, is the force
to come from which shall nerve the repentant one to essay
the steep ascent to the calm of indefectible virtue? And
what is the reward which can more than compensate for the
great renunciation? With regard to the first question, the
Stoic answer is clear. The reforming force is the divine
reason, indwelling in every human soul,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 66, § 12, ratio autem nihil aliud
est quam in corpus humanum pars
divini spiritus mersa.</note> which, if it is able,
or is permitted, to emancipate itself from bondage to the things
of sense, will inevitably gravitate to the divine world, from
which it sprang. The question of necessity and freedom of the
will has not much interest for Seneca, as a practical moralist.
He believes theoretically in the old Stoic dogmas on the subject.
<pb n="311"/><anchor id="Pg311"/>From one point of view, God may be regarded as the eternal
Fate, the inevitable law of causation. And as the Universal
Reason, He cannot act otherwise than He does, without violating
His very nature. But His action is self-determined and therefore
free and spontaneous.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nat. Quaest.</hi> ii. 36; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> 5,
§ 8, eadem necessitate et deos adligat
... ille ipse omnium conditor scripsit
quidem fata, sed sequitur; semper paret,
semel jussit.</note> This freedom man only attains by
breaking away from the cruel servitude to passion and external
circumstance. As a practical moral teacher, Seneca is bound
to say that we can take the higher road if we will. The first
step towards freedom is to grasp firmly the fundamental law
of the moral life—that the only good lies in conformity to
reason, to the higher part of our being. If we yield to its
bidding, we can at once cut ourselves off from the deceitful life
of the senses, and the vision of the true beatitude in virtue at
once opens on the inner eye. When that vision has been seen,
we must then seek to form a habit of the soul which shall
steadily conform to the universal law, and finally give birth
to a settled purpose, issuing inevitably in virtuous act.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 57; cf. 116, § 7, satis
natura dedit roboris si illo utamur.</note> It
is this fixed and stable resolution which is the Stoic ideal,
although experience showed that it was rarely attained. The
great renunciation is thus the entrance on a state of true freedom,
which is realised only by submitting ourselves to the
law of reason, that is of God. By obedience to rational law
man is raised to a level far transcending the transient and
shadowy dignities of the world. His rational and divine part
is reunited to the Divine Spirit which <q>makes for righteousness</q>;
he places himself in the sweep and freedom of a movement
which finds its image and counterpart in the majestic
and ordered movements of the heavenly spheres. If we ask,
how can poor humanity, so abject, so brutalised, so deadened
by the downward pressure of the flesh and the world, ever
release itself and rise to those empyrean heights, the answer is,
through the original strength of the rational, which is the
divine element in the human soul. It may be, and actually
is, in the mass of men, drugged and silenced by the seductions
of sense and the deceptions of the world. But if, in some
moment of detachment and elation, when its captors and
jailors relax their guard, it can escape their clutches, it will at
<pb n="312"/><anchor id="Pg312"/>once seek the region of its birth, and its true home. It is in
the kindred of the human reason with the Divine, the Reason
of the world, that we must seek the reconciliation of two
apparently opposite points of view. At one time the Stoic
doctor tells us that we must trust to our own strength in the
moral struggle. And again Seneca, in almost Christian phrase,
comforts his disciple with the vision of God holding out a
succouring hand to struggling virtue, just as he warns the
backslider of an eye <q>that seeth in secret.</q> Woe to him
who despises that Witness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 73, § 15, non sunt di
    <anchor id="corr312"/><corr sic="fastidiodosi">fastidiosi</corr>:
adscendentibus manum porrigunt;
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 83, § 1, nihil deo clusum est;
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 43, § 5, O te miserum si contemnis
hunc testem.</note>
</p>

<p>
With such a conception of the relation of the human reason to
the Divine, Seneca was bound to believe that human nature, as
it is, had fallen away from original and spontaneous innocence.
In the equal enjoyment of the unforced gifts of nature, in the
absence of the avarice and luxury which the development of
the arts, the exploitation of the earth’s hidden wealth, and the
competitive struggle, born of a social life growing more and
more complicated, have generated, the primeval man was unsolicited
by the passions which have made life a hell.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>, 90, § 38 sqq. avaritia omnia
fecit aliena et in angustum ex immenso
redacta paupertatem intulit, et multa
concupiscendo omnia amisit.</note> Yet
this blissful state was one of innocence rather than of virtue;
it was the result of ignorance of evil rather than determined
choice of good.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 46, non fuere sapientes;...
ignorantia rerum innocentes erant.</note> And the man who, in the midst of a corrupt
society, fights his way to virtue, will take far higher moral rank
than our simple ancestors, who wandered in the unravaged
garden of the Golden Age. For the man born in a time when
the nobler instincts have been deadened by the lust of gold
and power and sensual excess, the virtuous will can only be
won by a hard struggle.
</p>

<p>
Confronted with the facts of life, and fired with a passion to
win men to a higher law, the later Stoicism had in some points
to soften the rigid lines of earlier theory. The severe idealism
of the great doctors was a mere dream of an impossible detachment,
the inexorable demand of a pitiless logic. Virtue, being
conformity to the immutable law of reason, was conceived as a
rounded, flawless whole, to which nothing could be added, and
to which nothing must be wanting. It presupposes, or is
<pb n="313"/><anchor id="Pg313"/>identical with, a settled intellectual clearness, an unclouded
knowledge of the truly good, which must inevitably issue in
perfect act. It is a single, uniform mental state from which all
the separate virtues spring as from a single root.<note place="foot">Sen.
    <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 66, § 13 sqq.; 113, § 14,
Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi> iv. 15, 34; Plut. <hi rend="italic">Virt. Mor.</hi>
c. 2; Zeller, iii. 1, p. 224.</note> The moral
value of an act depends entirely on will, intention, that is, on
the intellectual perception. And as there are no gradations in
the mental state, so there are no gradations in moral conduct
which issues from it. There are no distinctions between
things morally good, between <q>divine</q> things; and so, just as
in the older Calvinistic system, there is no class intermediate
between the wise and the foolish, the saved and the lost.
And conversion, <q>transfiguration,</q> the change from folly to
wisdom, is regarded as instantaneous and complete.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
235; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Prof. in Virt.</hi> i.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὥστε τὸν πρωΐ κάκιστον ἑσπέρας γεγονέναι κράτιστον κτλ.</foreign>;
    <hi rend="italic">Adv. St.</hi> c. x.; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
76, § 19.</note> Even
those who are struggling upward, but have not yet reached
the top, are still to be reckoned among the foolish, just as the
man a few inches below the waves will be drowned as certainly
as if he were sunk fathoms deep. And, as there is no mean state
in morals, so the extremes are necessarily finished and perfect
types of virtue and reprobacy. The ideal <hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi>, who combines
in himself all the moral and intellectual attributes that
go to make up the ideal of serene, flawless virtue, has been the
mark for ridicule from the days of Horace.<note place="foot">Hor.
    <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 3, 124; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 1,
106; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 73, § 13; Aelian, <hi rend="italic">Var. Hist.</hi>
iv. 13; Luc. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Auct.</hi> c. 20,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μόνος οὗτος σοφός, μόνος καλός, μόνος ανδρεῖος βασιλεὺς ῥήτωρ, κτλ.</foreign></note> Such an ideal,
soaring into the pure cold regions of virgin snow, left the great
mass of men grovelling in filth and darkness. And it was in
this light that the severe Stoic regarded the condition of the
multitude. They are all equally bad, and they will always be
bad, from age to age. Every generation mourns over its degeneracy,
but it is no worse than its ancestors, and its posterity
will be no better. The only variation is in the various fashion of
the vices.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> i. 10, § 1, hoc majores
nostri questi sunt, hoc nos querimur,
hoc posteri nostri querentur, eversos
mores regnare nequitiam, in deterius
res humanas labi. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> c. iv.</note> In any crowded scene, says Seneca, in the forum or
the circus, you have a mere gathering of savage beasts, a spectacle
of vice incarnate.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8, § 1, istic
    tantumdem
esse vitiorum quantum hominum.</note> In the garb of peace, they are engaged in
a truceless war, hating the fortunate, trampling on the fallen.
<pb n="314"/><anchor id="Pg314"/>Viewing this scene of shameless lust and cupidity where every
tie of duty or friendship is violated, if the wise man were to
measure his indignation by the atrocity of the offenders, his
anger must end in madness. But we are all bad men living
among the bad, and we should be gentle to one another.
</p>

<p>
The idealism and the pessimism of the earlier Stoics were
alike fatal to any effort of moral reform. The cold, flawless
perfection of the man of triumphant reason was an impossible
model which could only discourage and repel aspirants to the
higher life. The ghastly moral wreck of ordinary human nature,
in which not a single germ of virtuous impulse seemed to have
survived the ruin, left apparently no hope of rescue or escape.
If morals were to be anything but an abstract theory, if they
were to have any bearing on the actual character and destiny
of man, their demand must be modified. And so in many
essential points it was, even before Seneca.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
637; cf. p. 249. Cf. Martha, <hi rend="italic">Mor.
sous l’Emp.</hi> p. 62. On Seneca’s relation
to the old Stoic theology, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Burgmann, <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s Theologie</hi>, p. 42 sq.</note> The ideal contempt
for all external things had to give way to an Aristotelian
recognition of the value of some of them for a virtuous life.
And Seneca is sometimes a follower of Aristotle, as in the
admission, so convenient to the millionaire, that wealth may be
used by the wise man for higher moral ends.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Vit. Beat.</hi> c. 22.</note> He will not be
the slave of money; he will be its master. He will admit it
to his home, but not to his heart, as a thing which may take to
itself wings at any moment, but which may meanwhile be used
to cheer and warm him in his struggles, and may be dispensed
in beneficent help to dependents. In the same way, beside the
ideal of perfect conformity to the law of reason, there appeared
a class of conditional duties. To conform absolutely to the law
of reason, to realise the highest good through virtue, remains
the highest Stoic ideal. But if, beside the highest good,
it is permitted to attach a certain value to some among
the external objects of desire, manifestly a whole class of
varying duties arises in the field of choice and avoidance.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 74, § 17; 87, § 29 sq.: <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi>
v. 13, § 1 sq.; Zeller, iii. 1, p. 638.</note>
And again the ideal of imperturbable calm, which approached
the apathy of the Cynics, was softened by the admission of
rational dispositions of feeling.<note place="foot"><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εὐπάθειαι</foreign>, cf. <hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi> xiv. §
2; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 2-4; Zeller, iii. 1, p. 216.</note> These concessions to
    im<pb n="315"/><anchor id="Pg315"/>perious facts of human life, of course, modified the awful
moral antithesis of wise and foolish, good and reprobate.
Where is the perfectly wise man, with his single moral
purpose, his unruffled serenity, his full assurance of his own
impregnable strength, actually to be found?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> vii. § 4, ubi enim
istum invenies quem tot seculis quaerimus?
Pro optimo est minime malus.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 42, § 1.</note> He is not to
be discovered among the most devoted adherents of the true
philosophic creed. Even a Socrates falls short of the sublime
standard. If we seek for the wise man in the fabulous past,
we shall find only heroic force, or a blissful, untempted ignorance,
which are alike wanting in the first essential of virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 44 sqq.</note> As
the perfect ideal of moral wisdom, imperturbable, assured,
and indefectible, receded to remote ideal distances, so the
condemnation of all moral states below an impossible perfection
to indiscriminate reprobacy<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 72, §§ 6-11.</note> had to be revoked.
Seneca maintains that men are all bad, but he is forced to
admit that they are not all equally bad, nay, that there are
men who, although not quite emancipated from the snares of
the world and the flesh, have reached various stages on the
upward way. He even distinguishes three classes of <hi rend="italic">proficientes</hi>,
of persons on the path of moral progress.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 75, § 8 sqq.</note> There is
the man who has conquered many serious vices, but is still
captive to others. Again, there is the man who has got rid
of the worst faults and passions, but who is not secure against
a relapse. There is a third class who have almost reached
the goal. They have achieved the great moral victory; they
have embraced the one true object of desire; they are safe
from any chance of falling away; but they want the final
gift of full assurance reserved for the truly wise.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 72, <sic>§ 8 sapiens</sic> laetitia fruitur
maxima, continua, sua.</note> They have
not attained to the crowning glory of conscious strength. Seneca
is still in bondage to the hard Stoic tradition, in spite of his
aberrations from it. The great Catholic virtue of humility is
to him still, theoretically at least, a disqualification for the
highest spiritual rank.
</p>

<p>
And yet Seneca is far from wanting in humility. In giving
counsels of perfection, he candidly confesses that he is himself
far from the ideal.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 57, § 3, non de me loquor, qui
multum ab homine tolerabili, nedum a
perfecto absum: cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 2.</note> Indeed, his <hi rend="italic">Letters</hi> reveal a character
<pb n="316"/><anchor id="Pg316"/>which, with lofty ideals, and energetic aspiration, is very far
removed from the serene joy and peace of the true Stoic sage.
He has not got the invulnerable panoply from which all the
shafts of fortune glance aside. He shows again and again how
deep a shadow the terror of his capricious master could cast
over his life, how he can be disturbed even by the smaller
troubles of existence, by the slights of great society, by the
miseries of a sea voyage, or the noises of a bath.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> ii. § 1; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 53, § 4;
<sic>56 §§ 1-3</sic>.</note> In the
counsels addressed to Lucilius, Seneca is probably quite as
often preaching to himself. The ennui, the unsteadiness of
moral purpose, the clinging to wealth and power, the haunting
fears or timid anticipations of coming evil, for which he is
constantly suggesting spiritual remedies, are diagnosed with
such searching skill and vividness that we can hardly doubt
that the physician has first practised his art upon himself.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24; esp. § 14.</note>
Nor has he entire faith in his own insight or in the potency
of the remedies which ancient wisdom has accumulated. The
great difficulty is, that the moral patient, in proportion to the
inveteracy of his disease, is unconscious of it.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 53, § 7, quo quis pejus se habet,
minus sentit.</note> Society, with
its manifold temptations of wealth and luxury and irresponsible
ease, can so overwhelm the congenital tendency to virtue,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 94, §§ 55, 56.</note>
that the inner monitor may be silenced, and a man may
come to love his depravity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 112, vitia sua et amat simul et
odit.</note> If men are not getting better,
they are inevitably getting worse. There is such a state, in
the end, as hopeless, irreclaimable reprobacy. Yet even for
the hoary sinner Seneca will not altogether despair, so long
as there lingers in him some divine discontent, however faint,
some lingering regret for a lost purity. He will not lose
hope of converting even a mocker like Marcellinus, who
amuses himself with jeers at the vices and inconsistencies of
professing philosophers, and does not spare himself. Seneca
may, perchance, give him a pause in his downward course.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
Seneca’s gospel, as he preaches it, is for a limited class.
With all his professed belief in the equality and brotherhood
of men, Seneca addresses himself, through the aristocratic
Epicurean Lucilius, to the slaves of wealth and the vices
<pb n="317"/><anchor id="Pg317"/>which it breeds. The men whom he wishes to save are
masters of great households, living in stately palaces, and
striving to escape from the weariness of satiety by visits to
Baiae or Praeneste.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 28, § 1.</note> They are men who have awful secrets,
and whose apparent tranquillity is constantly disturbed by
vague terrors,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 13, § 4 sq.; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 11.</note> whose intellects are wasted on the vanities
of a conventional culture or the logomachies of a barren
dialectic.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 117, § 31; 75, § 6.</note> They are people whose lives are a record of weak
purpose and conflicting aims, and who are surprised by old
age while they are still barely on the threshold of real moral
life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 13, § 17, quid est turpius quam
senex vivere incipiens?</note> With no religious or philosophic faith, death is to such
men the great terror, as closing for ever that life of the
flesh which has been at once so pleasant and so tormenting.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24.</note>
In dealing with such people, Seneca recognises the need both
of the great principles of right living and of particular precepts,
adapted to varieties of character and circumstance. The
true and solid foundation of conduct must always be the clear
perception of moral truth, giving birth to rightly-directed purpose
and supplying the right motive. For example, without a
true conception of God as a spirit, worship will be gross and
anthropomorphic.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 49.</note> The doctrine of the brotherhood of all men
in the universal commonwealth is the only solid ground of the
social charities and of humanity to slaves. Yet dogma is not
enough; discipline must be added. The moral director has to
deal with very imperfect moral states, some of quite rudimentary
growth, and his disciples may have to be treated as boys
learning to write, whose fingers the master must guide
mechanically across the tablet.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 94, § 5, digiti puerorum tenentur
et aliena manu per literarum
simulacra ducuntur.</note> The latent goodness of
humanity must be disencumbered of the load which, through
untold ages, corrupt society has heaped upon it. The delusions
of the world and the senses must be exposed, the judgment,
confused and dazzled by their glamour, must be cleared and
steadied, the weak must be encouraged, the slothful and backsliding
must be aroused to continuous effort in habitual converse
with some good man who has trodden the same paths
before.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 11, § 8; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Pr. Virt.</hi> xv.</note>
<pb n="318"/><anchor id="Pg318"/>Thus the great <q>Ars Vitae,</q> founded on a few simple
principles of reason, developed into a most complicated system
of casuistry and spiritual direction. How far it was successful
we cannot pretend to say. But the thoughtful reader of
Seneca’s <hi rend="italic">Letters</hi> cannot help coming to the conclusion that,
even in the reign of Nero, there must have been many of the
<hi rend="italic">proficientes</hi>, of candidates for the full Stoic faith. If Seneca
reveals the depths of depravity in his age, we are equally
bound to believe that he represents, and is trying to stimulate,
a great moral movement, a deep seated discontent with the hard,
gross materialism, thinly veiled under dilettantism and spurious
artistic sensibility, of which Nero was the type. Everything
that we have of Seneca’s, except the <hi rend="italic">Tragedies</hi>, deals with the
problems or troubles of this moral life, and the demand for
advice or consolation appears to have been urgent. Lucilius,
the young Epicurean procurator, who has been immortalised
by the <hi rend="italic">Letters</hi>, is only one of a large class of spiritual inquirers.
He not only lays his own moral difficulties before
the master, but he brings other spiritual patients for advice.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 25, § 1.</note>
There were evidently many trying to withdraw from the
tyranny or temptations of high life, with a more or less stable
resolution to devote themselves to reflection and amendment.
It is a curious pagan counterpart to the Christian ascetic
movement of the fourth and fifth centuries.<note place="foot">S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 127, §§ 5-7; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
118, § 5; Sulp. <hi rend="italic">Sev.</hi> ii. 13, § 7.</note> And, just as in
the days of S. Jerome and S. Paulinus, the deserter from the
ranks of fashion and pleasure in Nero’s time had to encounter
a storm of ridicule and misrepresentation. Philosophic retreat
was derided as mere languid self-indulgence, an unmanly
shrinking from social duty, nay, even a mere mask for the
secret vices which were, too often with truth, charged against
the <hi rend="italic">soi-disant</hi> philosopher.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 36, § 1, illum objurgant
quod umbram et otium petierit; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
123, § 15, illos quoque nocere nobis
existimo, qui nos sub specie Stoicae
sectae hortantur ad vitia: hoc enim
jactant solum sapientem et doctum esse
amatorem.</note> Sometimes the wish to lead a
higher life was openly assailed by a cynical Epicureanism.
Virtue and philosophy were mere idle babble. The only
happiness is to make the most of the senses while the senses
still keep their fresh lust for pleasure. The days are fleeting
away never to return in which we can drink with keen zest
<pb n="319"/><anchor id="Pg319"/>the joys of the flesh. What folly to spare a patrimony for a
thankless heir!<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 123, § 10. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Inscr. Or.
Henz.</hi> 4806, 4807, 4816.</note> Seneca had to deal with many souls wavering
between the two ideals. One of his treatises is addressed
to a kinsman, Annaeus Serenus, who had made a full confession
of a vague unrest, an impotence of will, the conflict of moral
torpor with high resolve.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> i.</note> In his better moments, Annaeus
inclines to simplicity of life and self-restraint. Yet a visit to
a great house dazzles him and disturbs his balance, with the
sight of its troops of elegant slaves, its costly furniture and
luxurious feasting. He is at one time drawn to philosophic
quietude; at another he becomes the strenuous ambitious
Roman of the old days, eager for the conflicts of the forum.
He is always wavering between a conviction of the vanity of
literary trifling and the passion for literary fame.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. §§ 13-15, nec aegroto nec
valeo;... In omnibus rebus haec
me sequitur bonae mentis infirmitas.
<hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 17, rogo, si quod habes remedium
quo hanc fluctuationem meam sistam,
dignum me putes qui tibi tranquillitatem
debeam.</note> Cannot
Seneca, to whom he owes his ideal, furnish some remedy for
this constant tendency to relapse and indecision?
</p>

<p>
It is in the sympathetic handling of such cases, not in
broad philosophic theory, that the peculiar strength of Seneca
lies. His counsels were adapted to the particular difficulties
presented to him. But many of them have a universal validity.
He encourages the wish to retire into meditative quietude, but
only as a means to moral cure.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 7, § 8; 19, § 2.</note> Retreat should not be an
ostentatious defiance of the opinion of the world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 68, ipsum otium absconde;
jactandi autem genus est nimis latere.</note> Nor is it
to be a mere cloak for timid or lazy shrinking from the
burdens of life. You should withdraw from the strife and
temptations of the mundane city, only to devote yourself to
the business of the spiritual city, to cultivate self-knowledge
and self-government, to inspire the soul with the contemplation
of the Eternal and the Divine. Solitude may be a
danger, unless a man lives in the presence of <q>One who seeth
in secret,</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 43, § 4; cf. 83, § 1; 10, § 2,
mecum loquor ... cave ne cum
homine malo loquaris.</note> from whom no evil thought is hidden, to whom
no prayer for evil things must be addressed.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 10, § 5, turpissima vota dis
insusurrant; cf. Pers. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> ii. 7-18;
Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 41, § 1.</note> And, lest the
thought of God’s presence may not come home with sufficient
<pb n="320"/><anchor id="Pg320"/>urgency, Seneca recommends his disciples to call up the
image of some good man or ancient sage, and live as if under
his eye.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 11, § 8; 104, § 21, vive cum Chrysippo,
cum Posidonio.</note> The first step in moral progress is self-knowledge
and confession of one’s faults.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 6, § 1; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 28; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 50, § 4;
Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Prof. in Virt.</hi> c. xi.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ πάθος λέγειν καὶ τὴν μοχθηρίαν ἀποκαλύπτειν οὐ φαῦλον ἂν εἴη προκοπῆς σημεῖον</foreign>.</note> Ignorance of our spiritual
disease, the doom of the indurated conscience, is the great
danger, and may be the mark of a hopeless moral state.
Hence the necessity for constant daily self-examination. In
the quiet of each night we should review our conduct and
feeling during the day, marking carefully where we have
fallen short of the higher law, and strengthening ourselves
with any signs of self-conquest. Seneca tells us that this
was his own constant practice.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 36, § 3.</note> For progress is only slow
and difficult. It requires watchful and unremitting effort to
reach that assured and settled purpose which issues spontaneously
in purity of thought and deed, and which raises man
to the level of the Divine freedom. There must be no pauses
of self-complacency until the work is done. There is no
mediocrity in morals. There must be no halting and unsteadiness
of purpose, no looking back to the deceitful things of
the world. Inconstancy of the wavering will only shortens the
span of this short life. How many there are who, even when
treading the last stage to death, are only beginning to live,
in the true sense, and who miss the beatitude of the man
who, having mastered the great secret, can have no addition
to his happiness from lengthened years. In the long tract of
time any life is but a moment, and of that the least part by
most men is really lived.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 32, § 2, in tanta brevitate vitae
quam breviorem inconstantia facimus,
etc.; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 99, § 11,
    <anchor id="corr320"/><corr sic="intelliges">intelleges</corr> etiam in
longissima vita minimum esse quod
vivitur.</note> And this unsettled aim is liable to
constant temptation from without. We are continually within
sight and earshot of the isles of the Sirens, and only the
resolution of a Ulysses will carry us past in safety.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 56, § 15; 51, § 5.</note> In fact
no isle of the Sirens can have been more dangerous than the life
of a great household in the Neronian age, when the dainties
and the vices of every land assailed the senses with multiplied
seductions, and men craved in vain for a heightened and keener
sensibility. Perpetual change of scene to the shores of Baiae,
<pb n="321"/><anchor id="Pg321"/>to Apulia, to some glen in the Apennines, or to the northern
lakes, or even further, to the Rhone, the Nile, the Atlas, was
sought by the jaded man of pleasure or the man struggling in
vain to reform. But Seneca warns his disciple that wherever
he may go he will take his vices and his weakness with him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 51, § 4; 104, § 20, si vis peregrinationes
habere jucundas, tuum
comitem sana.</note>
Let him try to work out his salvation within his great palace
on the Esquiline. Surrounded by splendour and luxury,
let him, for a time, isolate himself from them; let him lie
on a hard bed, and live on scanty fare, and fancy himself
reduced to that poverty which he dreads so much and so
foolishly.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 17, § 5; 18, § 8; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 87, § 1;
cf. Martha, p. 42.</note> The change will be good for body and soul; and
the temporary ascetic may return to his old life, at least
released from one of his bugbears, and refreshed with a new
sense of freedom.
</p>

<p>
Such were some of the precepts by which Seneca strove to
fortify the struggling virtue of his disciples. But he never
concealed from them that it is only by struggle that the remote
ideal can be attained. <q>Vivere militare est.</q> And almost in
the words of S. Paul, he uses the example of the gladiator or
the athlete, to arouse the energy of the aspirant after moral
perfection.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 96, § 5.</note> <q>They do it for a corruptible crown.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 78, § 16, 4, nos quoque evincamus
omnia, quorum praemium non
corona nec palma est, etc.</note> The
reward of the Stoic disciple is vain and poor to the gross
materialist. But, from the serene heights, where ideal Reason
watches the struggle, the only victor is the man who has
adopted the watchwords—self-knowledge, renunciation, resignation.
Only by following that steep path can any one ever
reach the goal of assured peace within, and be delivered from
the turmoil of chance and change. The misery of the sensual,
the worldly, and the ambitious lies in the fact that they have
staked their happiness on things which are beyond their own
power, which are the casual gifts of fortune, and may be as
capriciously withdrawn. This state is one of slavery to
external things, and the pleasure, after all, which can be drawn
from them is fleeting. Hence it is that the sensualist is
equally miserable when his pleasures are denied, and when
they are exhausted.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Vit. Beat.</hi> vii. § 4; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 83, § 27.</note> He places his happiness in one brief
<pb n="322"/><anchor id="Pg322"/>moment, with the danger or the certainty either of privation
or satiety. The wise man of the Stoics, on the other hand,
has built his house upon the rock. He shuns, according to
the Pythagorean maxim, the ways of the multitude, and
trusting to the illumination of divine Reason, he takes the
narrow path.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 37.</note> His guiding light is the principle that the
<q>kingdom of heaven is within,</q> that man’s supreme good
depends only on himself, that is, on the unfettered choice of
reason. To such a man <q>all things are his,</q> for all worth
having is within him. His mind creates its own world, or
rather it rediscovers a lost world which was once his. He can,
if he will, annihilate the seductions of the flesh and the world,
which cease to disturb when they are contemned. He may
equally extinguish the griefs and external pains of life, for each
man is miserable just as he thinks himself.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 96; 98, §§ 2, 7.</note> Human nature,
even unfortified by philosophic teaching, has been found capable
of bearing the extremity of torture with a smile. The man
who has mastered the great secret that mind may, by its latent
forces, create its own environment, should be able to show the
endurance of a Scaevola or a Regulus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> iii. § 4.</note> All he needs to do is to
unmask the objects of his dread.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 13, rebus persona demenda
est.</note> For just as men are deluded
by the show of material pleasure, so are they unmanned by
visionary fears. Even the last event of life should have no
terror for the wise man, on any rational theory of the future of
the soul. The old mythical hell, the stone of Sisyphus, the
wheel of Ixion, Cerberus, and the ghostly ferryman, may be
dismissed to the limbo of fable.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 18; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 36, § 10; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 30,
§ 17; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 58, § 27; cf. Epict. ii. 1.</note> For the man who has followed
the inner light, death must either be a return to that
antenatal calm of nothingness which has left no memory, or
the entrance to a blissful vision of the Divine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> vi. § 6; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> 25; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
102, §§ 23-26, Per has mortalis aevi
moras illi meliori vitae longiorique proluditur.</note> Even in this
luxurious and effeminate time, men and women of all ranks and
ages have shown themselves ready to escape from calamity or
danger by a voluntary death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 11.</note> And what after all is death?
It is not the terminus of life, a single catastrophe of a moment.
In the very hour of birth we enter on the first stage in the
journey to the grave. We are dying daily, and our last day
<pb n="323"/><anchor id="Pg323"/>only completes the process of a life-long death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24, § 20; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 36.</note> And as to
the shortness of our days, no life is short if it has been full.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 93, § 2, longa est vita si
plena est; cf. 101, § 10, singulos dies
singulas vitas puta.</note>
The mass of men are only living in an ambiguous sense; they
linger or vegetate in life, they do not really live. Nay, many
are long since dead when the hour of so-called death arrives.
And the men who mourn over the shortness of their days are
the greatest prodigals of the one thing that can never be
replaced.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi> viii. § 1.</note> In the longest life, on a rational estimate, how
small a fraction is ever really lived! The whole past, which
might be a sure and precious possession, is flung away by the
eager, worldly man.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x.</note> The fleeting present is lost in unrest or
reckless procrastination, or in projecting ourselves into a future
that may never come. Thus old age surprises us while we
are mere children in moral growth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ix. § 4, pueriles adhuc animos
senectus opprimit.</note>
</p>

<p>
At certain moments, the Stoic ideal might seem to be in
danger of merging itself in the self-centred isolation of the
Cynic, asserting the defiant independence of individual virtue,
the nothingness of all external goods, the omnipotence of the
solitary will. And undoubtedly, in the last resort, Seneca
has pictured the wise man thus driven to bay, and calmly
defying the rage of the tyrant, the caprices of fortune, the
loss of health and wealth, nay the last extremity of torture
and ignominious death. His own perilous position, and the
prospect of society in the reign of Nero, might well lead a
man of meditative turn so to prepare himself for a fate which
was always imminent. But the Stoic doctor could never
acquiesce in a mere negative ideal, the self-centred independence
of the individual soul. He was too cultivated, he
had drunk too deep of the science and philosophy of the
past, he had too wide an outlook over the facts of human life
and society, to relegate himself to a moral isolation which was
apt to become a state of brutal disregard of the claims of
social duty, and even of personal self-respect.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
329, der Stoiker ist zu gebildet ... um
den Werth der wissenschaftlichen Weltbetrachtung
zu verkennen.</note> Such a position
was absolutely impossible to a man like Seneca. Whatever
his practice may have been, it is clear that in temperament he
was almost too soft and emotional. He was a man with an
<pb n="324"/><anchor id="Pg324"/>intense craving for sympathy, and lavish of it to others; he was
the last man in the world who could enjoy a solitary paradise
of self-satisfied perfection. It is true the Roman world to
the eyes of Seneca lay in the shadow of death, crushed under
a treacherous despotism, and enervated by gross indulgence.
Yet, although he sees men in this lurid light, he does not
scorn or hate them. It was not for nothing that Seneca had
been for five years the first minister of the Roman Empire.
To have stood so near the master of the world, and felt the
pulse of humanity from Britain to the Euphrates, to have
listened to their complaints and tried to minister to their needs,
was a rare education in social sympathy. It had a profound
effect on M. Aurelius, and it had left its mark on Seneca.<note place="foot">Cf. Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1,
p. 277, die Philosophie immer nur die
geschichtlich vorhandenen Zustände
abspiegele.</note>
</p>

<p>
Two competing tendencies may be traced in Stoicism, and
in Seneca’s exposition of it. On the one hand, man must
seek the harmony of his nature by submitting his passions
and emotions to his own higher nature, and shaking himself free
from all bondage to the flesh or the world. On the other
hand, man is regarded as the subject of the universal Reason,
a member of the universal commonwealth, whose maker and
ruler is God.<note place="foot">Burgmann, <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s Theologie</hi>, p.
26.</note> The one view might make a man aim merely
at isolated perfection; it might produce the philosophic monk.
The other and broader conception of humanity would make man
seek his perfection, not only in personal virtue, but in active
sympathy with the movement of the world. The one impulse
would end in a kind of spiritual selfishness. The other
would seek for the full development of spiritual strength in
the mutual aid and sympathy of struggling humanity, in
friendship,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 109, § 10; 9, § 15.</note> in the sense of a universal brotherhood and the
fatherhood of God. There are two cities, says Seneca, in
which a man may be enrolled—the great society of gods and
men, wide as the courses of the sun; the other, the Athens or
the Carthage to which we are assigned by the accident of
birth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Otio</hi>, iv.; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 68, § 2; cf. S.
Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, xi. 1.</note> A man may give himself to the service of both
societies, or he may serve the one and neglect the other. The
wise man alone realises to the full his citizenship in the
spiritual commonwealth, in pondering on the problems of
<pb n="325"/><anchor id="Pg325"/>human conduct, the nature of the soul, of the universe and
God, and conforming his moral being to the eternal law of
Nature. The sage, a Zeno or a Chrysippus, may rightly devote
himself exclusively to contemplation and moral self-culture.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
274; Stob. <hi rend="italic">Flor.</hi> 45, 29; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 29,
§ 11.</note>
He may not, by wealth and station, have access to the arena of
active life. And, although a seeming recluse, he may really be
a far greater benefactor of his kind than if he led the Senate,
or commanded armies. There may be cases in which a man
may be right in turning his back on public life, in order to
concentrate all his energies on self-improvement. And Seneca
does not hesitate to counsel Lucilius to withdraw himself from
the thraldom of office.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 19, § 6, subduc cervicem jugo
tritam.</note> Yet Zeno’s precept was that the
wise man will serve the State unless there be some grave
impediment in his way.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Otio</hi>, iii. § 2, accedet ad rempublicam
nisi si quid impedierit.</note> For, on Stoic principles, we are all
members one of another, and bound to charity and mutual
help. And all speculation and contemplation are vain and
frivolous unless they issue in right action. Yet the practical
difficulty for the <hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi> was great, if not insuperable. What
earthly commonwealth could he serve with consistency; is it
an Athens, which condemned a Socrates to death, and drove an
Aristotle into exile?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. § 1, interrogo ad quam
rempublicam sapiens sit accessurus,
ad Athenas in qua Socrates damnatur,
etc.; cf. Diog. <anchor id="corr325"/><corr sic="(italics removed)">Laert.</corr> v. 1.</note> How please the vulgar sensual crowd
without displeasing God and conscience? It might seem that
the true disciple of Stoicism could not take a part in public
life save under some ideal polity, such as Plato or Chrysippus
dreamed of.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. § 131.</note> Here, as elsewhere, the problem was solved
with varying degrees of consistency. The problem is stated
by Seneca—<q>Se contentus est sapiens ad beate vivendum,
non ad vivendum.</q><note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 9, § 13.</note> It is the ever-recurring conflict between
lofty idealism and the facts of human life, which is softened,
if not solved, from age to age by casuistry. The wise and
good man should have the springs of his happiness in himself.
Yet a wise friend may call forth his powers, and furnish an
object of self-sacrifice.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 109, § 3 sqq.</note> The wise man will not entangle
himself in the cares of family life.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 22, § 69.</note> Yet wife and child are
<pb n="326"/><anchor id="Pg326"/>needed to give completeness to the life of the citizen. Since
man exists for the general order, how can he avoid lending his
services to the State, unless there be some insuperable bar?
The controversy between the dream of solitary perfection and
altruism was variously solved, and the particular solution
could always be defended in the light of the great law of
life. Epictetus, cut off from the great world by servile birth
and poverty, could make light of marriage, of the begetting of
future citizens, and the duties of political life.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> i. 9, § 1 sqq.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἢ τὸ τοῦ Σωκράτους, μηδέποτε πρὸς τὸν πυθόμενον, ποδαπός ἐστι,
    εἰπεῖν ὅτι Ἀθηναῖος ἢ Κορίνθιος, ἀλλ’ ὅτι Κόσμος</foreign>.</note> On the other
hand, M. Aurelius, by nature as detached as Epictetus, might
refuse to follow the transcendental counsels of Chrysippus and
Seneca. He might strive painfully to reconcile devotion to an
irksome political charge with a dream of that unseen commonwealth
<q>in which the cities of men are as it were houses.</q><note place="foot">M. Aurel. iii. 11; vi. 44,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πόλις καὶ πατρὶς ὡς μὲν Ἀντωνίνῳ μοι ἡ Ῥώμη, ὡς δὲ ἀνθρώπῳ ὁ Κόσμος</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet in spite of these difficulties about public duty, no
one outside the pale of Christianity has perhaps ever insisted
so powerfully on the obligation to live for others, on the
duty of love and forgiveness, as Seneca has done. We are
all, bond or free, ruler or subject, members one of another,
citizens of a universal commonwealth.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 52; cf. M. Aurel.
iv. 4,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὁ κόσμος ὡσανεὶ πόλις ἐστί</foreign>: Epict.
<hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> i. 13, § 3; Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Leg.</hi> i. 7, 23, ut
jam universus hic mundus una civitas
sit communis deorum atque hominum
existimanda.</note> We have all within
us a portion of the Divine spirit. No man can live entirely
to himself.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47, § 2, alteri vivas oportet,
si vis tibi vivere; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 55, non sibi vivit
qui nemini.</note> If we are not doing good to others we are doing
harm. The nature of man and the constitution of the universe
make it a positive obligation to seek the welfare of our fellows.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Otio</hi>, iii. § 5.</note>
The social instinct is innate and original in us. As man is
flung upon the world at birth, or in the natural state, with all
his immense possibilities as yet undeveloped, no creature is
so helpless.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Benef.</hi> iv. 18, § 2, nudum et
infirmum societas munit.</note> It was only by combination and mutual good
offices that men were able to repel the dangers which surrounded
the infancy of the race, and to conquer the forces
of nature. Man is born for social union, which is cemented
by concord, kindness, and love,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, i. 5, § 2.</note> and he who shows anger,
selfishness, perfidy, or cruelty to his fellows strikes at the
<pb n="327"/><anchor id="Pg327"/>roots of social life. Nor should the spectacle of universal
depravity cause us to hate or despise our kind.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 10, § 5 sqq.</note> It is quite
true that the mass of men are bad, and always will be bad,
with only rare exceptions. If society is the source of many
blessings, it is also a great corruptor, and the conquest of
nature and the development of the arts have aroused insatiable
passions which have darkened the eye of reason.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 8 and 9; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 90, § 9 sqq.;
<hi rend="italic">N. Quaest.</hi> v. 15.</note> Yet this
crowd of sinners are our brothers, with the germs of virtue in
their grain. They have taken the broad way almost necessarily,
because it is broad. A general may punish individual soldiers,
but you must pardon an army when it deserts the standards.
The truly wise, not knowing whether to laugh or weep, will
look kindly on the erring masses, as sick men who need a
physician.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 10, §§ 6-8.</note> And beside the few truly wise, who can cast the
first stone? We are all more or less bad, we have all gone
astray.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 6, § 3, peccavimus
omnes.</note> And yet we constantly show the utmost severity to
the faults of others, while we forget or ignore our own.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 28, § 8, aliena vitia in
oculis habemus, a tergo nostra sunt.</note> Even
as God is long-suffering to transgressors, and sends His rain
upon the evil and good alike, so should we be merciful in
judgment and lavish in beneficence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iv. 4 and 5; iv. 28; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>,
iii. 26.</note> The spectacle of universal
greed and selfishness and ingratitude should not harden
us against our fellows, but rather make us turn our eyes to our
own faults.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 28.</note> Sometimes, indeed, the note of humility is
absent, and Seneca is the serene <hi rend="italic">sapiens contra mundum</hi>, or
the proud Roman gentleman who will not demean himself to
resent or even notice the insults or injuries of the spiteful
crowd.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 5, ingens animus et verus
aestimator sui non vindicat injuriam
quia non sentit.... Ultio doloris
confessio est.</note> They will pass him by as the licensed jests of the
slaves on the Saturnalia. He reminds himself that it is the lower
air which is turbid with storm and thunder; the ether which
spreads around the stars is never vexed and darkened by the
tempest.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 6.</note> This is one of the recurring contrasts in Seneca
between the moral tone of the old world and that of the great
movement which was setting in. But the new prevails in the
end. The conception of God as cold reason or impersonal law
<pb n="328"/><anchor id="Pg328"/>or fate gives way to the thought of a God who guides by His
providence, who embraces all by His love, whose goodness is
as boundless as His power, who is best worshipped by the
imitation of His goodness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 65, § 24; <hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> viii. § 3; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
41, § 2; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iv. 4 and 7; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 10,
§ 5, sic vive tamquam deus videat;
Siedler, <hi rend="italic">De Sen. Phil. Mor.</hi> p. 14;
Burgmann, <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s Theologie</hi>, p. 32.</note> As the vision grows, the pride of
the invulnerable <hi rend="italic">sapiens</hi>, who might make himself the equal or
more than the equal of God,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> vi. § 6, hoc est quo deum
antecedatis.</note> shrinks and is abased. We are
all more or less bad, and we should be gentle to one another.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 26; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> i. 10.</note>
Do we complain of coldness and ingratitude? Let us think
how many a kindness done to us in early days, the tenderness
of a nurse, a friend’s wise counsel or help in critical times,
we have carelessly let slip from memory.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> vii. 28, § 2.</note> The faults which
irritate us in another are often lurking in ourselves. Forgive
if you wish for forgiveness; conquer evil with good; do good
even to those who have wrought you evil.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 26; ii. 28; ii. 31.</note> Let us copy the
serene example of those Eternal Powers who constantly load
with their benefits even those who doubt of their existence,
and bear with unruffled kindness the errors of frail souls that
stumble by the way.
</p>

<p>
And as we shall not be harsh to those of our own external
rank, so shall we soften the lot of those whom fortune has
condemned to slavery. Even the slave is admitted to that
great city of gods and men, which has no frontiers, which
embraces all races and ranks, where all ranks should be
levelled by the consciousness of a common Divine descent and
a universal brotherhood of men.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 28, unus omnium
parens mundus est. Cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 47; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>,
iii. 24; iii. 35; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 18.</note> The conquests of Macedon
and Rome, overthrowing all old-world national barriers, had
prepared the way for the greatest and most fruitful triumph
of ancient philosophy. And the Stoic school has the glory of
anticipating the diviner dream, yet far from realised, of a
human brotherhood under the light from the Cross. Seneca
has never risen higher, or swept farther into the future than
in his treatment of slavery. He is far in advance of many
a bishop or abbot or Christian baron of the middle age. Can
a slave confer a benefit? he asks.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 18.</note> Is his service, however
lavish, not merely a duty to his lord, which, as it springs
<pb n="329"/><anchor id="Pg329"/>from constraint, is undeserving of gratitude? Seneca repudiates
the base suggestion with genuine warmth. On
the same principle a subject cannot confer a benefit on his
monarch, a simple soldier on his general. There is a limit
beyond which power cannot command obedience. There is a
line between cringing compliance and generous self-sacrifice.
And the slave has often passed that limit. He has often borne
wounds and death to save his master’s life in battle. He has
often, in the years of the terror, endured the last extremity of
torture, rather than betray his secrets.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 19 and 26; cf. Macrob.
<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 11, § 16.</note> The body of the slave
is his master’s; his mind is his own.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 20, interior illa pars
mancipio dari non potest.</note> It cannot be bought and
sold. And in his inner soul, the slave is his master’s equal.
He is capable of equal virtue and equal culture; nay, in both he
may be his master’s superior. He can confer a benefit if he can
suffer injury in the outrages which cruelty and lust inflict upon
him. When he confers a benefit, he confers it as man upon
man, as an equal in the great family whose Father is God.
</p>

<p>
Seneca gives a lurid picture of the corruption of women in
the general licence of his age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> xvi. § 3; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, § 21,
libidine vero ne maribus quidem
cedunt.</note> Yet he has a lofty ideal of
what women might become. Like other Stoic preachers, it
was his good fortune to be surrounded by good women from
his infancy. He remembers the tenderness of his aunt, in
whose arms he first entered Rome as a child, who nursed him
through long sickness, and broke through her reserve to help
him in his early career of ambition. Her blameless character
escaped even the petulance of Alexandrian gossip.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> xix. § 2, § 6; Marcia’s
husband, probably Vitrasius Pollio,
was governor of Egypt.—Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">R.
Lit.</hi> § 282, 1.</note> His letters
to his mother, Helvia, reveal a matron of the best Roman
type—strong, self-denying, proud of her motherhood, and
despising the extravagance and ostentation of her class. In
spite of her father’s limited idea of female culture, she had
educated herself in liberal studies, and found them a refuge
in affliction.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Helv.</hi> xv.-xvii. § 3.</note> Marcia was of a softer type, and gave way to
excessive grief for a lost child. Yet it is to her that Seneca
unfolds most fully his ideal of feminine character. He will not
admit the inferior aptitude of women for virtue and culture.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xvi. par illis, mihi crede,
vigor, etc.</note>
<pb n="330"/><anchor id="Pg330"/>Women have the same inner force, the same capacity for nobleness
as men. The husband of Paulina who surrounded him
with affectionate sympathy, and was prepared to die along with
him, the man who had witnessed the stern courage and loving
devotion of the wives of the Stoic martyrs, might well have a
lofty ideal of woman’s character.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 63, 64; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
104, §§ 1-6.</note> But to any true disciple of
the Porch that ideal had a surer ground than any personal
experience, however happy. The creed which Seneca held was
at once a levelling and an elevating creed. It found the only
nobility or claim to rank in higher capacity for virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iii. 28; iii. 20.</note> It
embraced in the arms of its equal charity all human souls,
bond or free, male or female, however they might be graded
by convention or accident, who have a divine parentage, and
may, if they will, have a lofty, perhaps an eternal future.
</p>

<p>
And now, in taking leave of Seneca, let us forget the
fawning exile in Corsica, the possible lover of Julia or
Agrippina, the millionaire minister of Nero, who was surrounded
by a luxury and state which moved the envy of the tyrant.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> xii. xiii. § 4; D. Cass.
lxi. 10; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 42.</note>
Rather let us think of the ascetic from his early youth, who,
raised by his talents to the highest place, had to reconcile an
impossible ideal with the sordid or terrible realities of that rank
which was at once a <q>pinnacle and a precipice.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 94, § 73, quae aliis excelsa
videntur, ipsis praerupta sunt.</note> He was
continually torn by the contrast between the ideal of a lofty
Stoic creed and the facts of human life around him, between
his own spiritual cravings and the temptations or the necessities
of the opportunist statesman. He was imbued with principles
of life which could be fully realised only in some Platonic
Utopia; he had to deal with men as they were in the reign of
Nero, as they are painted by Tacitus and Petronius. If he
failed in the impossible task of such a reconciliation, let us do
him the justice of recognising that he kept his vision clear,
and that he has expounded a gospel of the higher life, which,
with all its limitations from temperament or tradition, will be
true for our remotest posterity, that he had a vision of the City
of God.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Otio</hi>, iv. duas respublicas
animo complectamur, etc.</note> He was not personally perhaps so pure and clear a
soul as Plutarch or Aristides or Dion Chrysostom. But he
<pb n="331"/><anchor id="Pg331"/>had utterly cast off that heathen anthropomorphism which
crossed and disturbed their highest visions of the Divine.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> ap. Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>,
vi. 10; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 41, § 1, non sunt ad caelum
elevandae manus, nec exorandus aedituus,
ut nos ad aurem simulacri quasi
magis exaudiri possimus admittat.</note>
Seneca is far more modern and advanced than even the
greatest of the Neo-Platonic school, just because he saw that
the old theology was hopelessly effete. He could never have
joined in the last struggle of philosophic paganism with
the Church. And so the Church almost claimed him as
her son, while it never dreamt of an affinity with Plutarch
or Plotinus.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, there needed only the change of some phrases to
reconcile the teaching of Seneca with that of the great ascetic
Christian doctors. Many of the headings of the <hi rend="italic">Imitation</hi>
might be attached to paragraphs of Seneca—<q>of bearing with
the faults of others</q>; <q>of inordinate affections</q>; <q>of the
love of solitude and silence</q>; <q>of meditation on death</q>; <q>of
humble submission</q>; <q>that to despise the world and serve
God is sweet</q>; <q>of the acknowledgment of our own infirmities,
and the remembrance of God’s benefits</q>; <q>of the contempt of
temporal honour and vain secular knowledge</q>; <q>of the day of
eternity and this life’s straitness.</q> In truth, the great spirits
of all ages who have had a genius for religion, after due allowance
for difference of association and difference of phrase, are
strangely akin and harmonious. And Seneca had one great
superiority over other equally religious souls of his time, which
enables him to approach mediaeval and modern religious thought—he
had broken absolutely with paganism. He started with
belief in the God of the Stoic creed; he never mentions the
Stoic theology which attempted to reconcile Him with the
gods of the Pantheon. In spite of all his rhetoric, he tries to
see the facts of human life and the relation of the human spirit
to the Divine in the light of reason, with no intervening veil
of legend. God is to Seneca the great Reality, however halting
human speech may describe Him, as Fate, or Law, or Eternal
Reason, or watchful loving Providence. God is within us,
in whatever mysterious way, inspiring good resolves, giving
strength in temptation, with all-seeing eye watching the issue
of the struggle. God is without us, loading us with kindness
<pb n="332"/><anchor id="Pg332"/>even when we offend, chastising us in mercy, the goal of all
speculation, He from whom we proceed, to whom we go at death.
The true worship of Him is not in formal prayer and sacrifice,
but in striving to know and imitate His infinite goodness.
We mortal men in our brief life on earth may be citizens of
two commonwealths, one the Rome or Corinth of our birth,
the other that great city of gods and men, in which all are
equally united, male and <anchor id="corr332"/><corr sic="female">female,</corr> bond and free, as children
of a common Father. In this ideal citizenship, in obedience
to the law of the spiritual city, the eternal law which makes
for righteousness, man attains his true freedom and final
beatitude in communion with kindred souls.
</p>

<p>
Yet, as in mediaeval and puritan religious theory, there is
in Seneca a strange conflict between pessimism and idealism.
To the doomed philosophic statesman of the reign of Nero, the
days of man’s life are few and evil. Life is but a moment in
the tract of infinite age, and so darkened by manifold sins and
sorrows that it seems, as it did to Sophocles, a sinister gift.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Polyb.</hi> iv.</note>
On the other hand, its shortness is a matter of no importance;
the shortest life may be full and glad if it be dignified by
effort and resignation and conformity to the great law of the
universe. The wise and pious man, ever conscious of his brief
time of probation, may brighten each passing day into a
festival and lengthen it into a life. The shortness of a life is
only an illusion, for long or short have no meaning when
measured by the days of eternity. And the philosopher may
unite many lives in one brief span. He may join himself to
a company of sages who add their years to his, who counsel
without bitterness, and praise without flattery; he may be
adopted into a family whose wealth increases the more it is
divided; in him all the ages may be combined in a single life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Brev. Vit.</hi> xv. § 3 sq.</note>
To such a spirit death loses all its terrors. The eternal mystery
indeed can be pierced only by imaginative hope. Death, we
may be sure, however, can only be a change. It may be a
passage into calm unconsciousness, as before our birth, which
will release us from all the griefs and tumults of the life here
below. It may, on the other hand, prove to be the morning
of an eternal day, the entrance to a radiant and untroubled
world of infinite possibilities. In any case, the spirit which
<pb n="333"/><anchor id="Pg333"/>has trained itself in obedience to eternal law, will not tremble
at a fate which is surely reserved for the universe, by fire
or flood or other cataclysmal change. The future in store for
the soul is either to dwell for ever among things divine, or
to sink back again into the general soul, and God shall be
all in all.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="2" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="334"/><anchor id="Pg334"/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. The philosophic missionary"/><index index="pdf" level1="II. The philosophic missionary"/>
<head>CHAPTER II</head>

<head type="sub">THE PHILOSOPHIC MISSIONARY</head>

<p>
The gospel of philosophy expounded by Seneca was rather an
esoteric or aristocratic creed. With all his liberal sentiment,
his cosmopolitanism, his clear conception of human equality
and brotherhood, Seneca always remains the director of souls
like his own, enervated by wealth, tortured with the ennui of
jaded sensibility, haunted by the terror of the Caesars.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 77, § 6, cogita quamdiu
jam idem facias: cibus, somnus, libido;
per hunc circulum curritur; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24,
§ 25, quosdam subit eadem faciendi
videndique satietas; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 21; 95,
§ 20; 13, § 4; 24, §§ 11-14; 91, § 5, 6;
<hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> ii. § 13; x. § 5, 6.</note> Indeed
Stoicism was always rather a creed for the cultivated upper
class than for the crowd. In its prime, its apparatus of
logical formulae, its elaborate physics and metaphysics, its
essentially intellectual solution of the problems both of the
universe and human life, necessarily disabled it from ever
developing into a popular system. And in the later days
of the Republic, theory became more important than practice,
and logic passed into casuistry.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, pp.
46, 47; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, § 20; 117, § 20.</note> But in the first century,
Stoicism came to be much more a religion than a philosophy,
or even a theology. Its main business, as conceived by
men like Seneca, is to save souls from the universal shipwreck
of character<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 48, § 8, omnes undique ad
te manus tendunt, etc.</note> caused by the capricious excesses of
luxury, the idolatry of the world and the flesh, which
sprang from a riotous pride in the material advantages of
imperial power, without a sobering sense of duty or a moral
ideal. But, in the nature of things, this wreck of character
was most glaringly seen among the men who were in close
contact with the half insane masters of the world in the first
century, and who possessed the resources to exhaust the
possi<pb n="335"/><anchor id="Pg335"/>bilities of pleasure or the capacities of the senses to enjoy.
It is to people of this class, who still retained some lingering
instincts of goodness, weary with indulgence, bewildered and
tortured by the conflict of the lower nature with the weak,
but still disturbing, protests of the higher, that Seneca
addresses his counsels.
</p>

<p>
But what of the great masses lying outside the circle of
cultivated and exhausted self-indulgence, that plebeian world
of which we have seen the picture in their municipalities and
colleges? It is clear from the records of their daily life, their
ambitions, their tasks and amusements, that, although perhaps
not generally tainted with such deep corruption as the nobles
of the Neronian age, their moral tone and aspirations hardly
correspond to the material splendour of the Empire. Even
apart from the glimpses of low life in Petronius, Martial,
and Apuleius, apart from the revelations of Pompeii, and the
ghastly traditions which haunt the ruins of countless theatres
and amphitheatres, the warnings of preachers of that age,
such as Dion Chrysostom, and the reflections of the infinitely
charitable M. Aurelius, leave no very favourable impression of
the moral condition of the masses.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. ix. 34; v. 33,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">γυμνὰ νόμιζε βλέπειν τὰ ψυχάρια αὐτῶν. ὅτε δοκοῦσι βλάπτειν ψέγοντες ἢ ὠφελεῖν
    ἐξυμνοῦντες, ὅση οἴησις; ... καὶ κυνίδια διακναιόμενα καὶ παιδία φιλόνεικα,
    γελῶντα, εἶτα εὐθὺς κλαίοντα. Πίστις δὲ καὶ αἰδὼς καὶ δίκη καὶ ἀλήθεια
    πρὸς Ὄλυμπον ἀπὸ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης.</foreign> Petron.
<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 88; Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 8; D. Chrys.
xiii. § 13, 33; vii. 133.</note> How could it be otherwise?
The old paganism of Rome did indeed foster certain
ancestral pieties which were the salt of the Roman character.
But it unfortunately also gave its sanction to scenes of lust
and cruelty which went far to counteract in later times any
good it did. Nor had the old religion any means for edification
and the culture of character. It had no organisation for
the care and direction of souls in moral doubt and peril. If
its oracles might, from a few old-world examples, seem to
supply such a spiritual want, the appearance is delusive even
according to pagan testimony. Poets and moralists alike
thundered against the shameless impiety which often begged
the sanction of a prophetic shrine for some meditated sin,<note place="foot">Pers. ii. 4 sqq.; cf. Herod. vi. 86;
Luc. <hi rend="italic">Icaromen.</hi> 25.</note>
and the charge has been confirmed by the resurrection of these
old profanities from the ruins of Dodona.<note place="foot">Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Lucian und die Kyniker</hi>,
p. 34.</note> But even without
<pb n="336"/><anchor id="Pg336"/>direct testimony, we might fairly conclude that the Antonine
Age was, by reason of its material development, in special
need of spiritual teaching and evangelism. The whole stress
of public and private effort was towards the provision of
comfort or splendour or amusement for the masses. And,
within the range of its ambition, it succeeded marvellously.
Nor should an impartial inquirer refuse to admit that such an
immense energy has its good moral side. The rich were
rigorously taught their duty to society, and they improved
upon the lesson. The masses responded to their generous
public spirit with gratitude and affection; and the universal
kindliness and fraternity diffused through all ranks on days of
high religious festival or civic interest, afforded a very wholesome
and gratifying spectacle.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <ref target="Pg231">p. 231</ref> of this work. Yet cf.
Luc. <hi rend="italic">Somn. seu Gallus</hi>, 22,
   <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἱ δὲ πλούσιοι φρίττουσι καὶ διανομαῖς ἱλάσκονταί σε κτλ.</foreign></note> There was an undoubted
softening of the Roman character. And the labours of the
great Stoic lawyers were giving expression to cultivated moral
feeling, in a more liberal recognition of the natural rights of
the weak and oppressed, of women and of slaves. Yet a
society may be humane and kindly while it is also worldly
and materialised. To us at least, the forces of the Antonine
age seem to have expended themselves chiefly on the popular
pleasures and external adornments of life, or a revival, often in
the grossest and most absurd forms, as we shall see in a later
chapter, of the superstitions of the past. With all its humanitarian
sentiment and all its material glories, the Roman world
had entered on that fatal incline, which, by an unperceived yet
irresistible movement, led on to the sterilisation of the higher
intellect, and the petrifaction of Roman society which ended in
the catastrophe of the fifth century.
</p>

<p>
The triumphs and splendour of corporate life in the age of
the Antonines are certainly a dazzling spectacle. Yet to the
student who is more occupied with the painful moral education
of the race, the interest lies in a different direction. It was
a worldly age, but it was also an age ennobled by a powerful
protest against worldliness. And in this chapter we shall
study a great movement, which, under the name of philosophy
or culture, called the masses of men to a higher standard of
life. This movement, like all others of the same kind, had its
<pb n="337"/><anchor id="Pg337"/>impostors who disgraced it. Yet the man who has pursued
them with such mordant ridicule and pitiless scorn, the man
who was utterly sceptical as to the value of all philosophic
effort, in the last resort approaches very near to the view of
human life which was preached by the men whom he derides.<note place="foot">Croiset, <hi rend="italic">Lucien</hi>, p. 164, il a subi
fortement leur influence en écrivant les
<hi rend="italic">Dialogues des morts</hi>.</note>
Lucian belonged to no philosophic school; he would himself
have repudiated adhesion to any system. The advice of
Teiresias to Menippus, when he sought him in the shades,
would certainly have been Lucian’s to any young disciple who
consulted him. Have done with all these verbal subtleties and
chimeras; swear allegiance to no sect; make the best of the
present; and take things generally with a smile.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Menip.</hi> c. 21.</note> Yet who
can read the <hi rend="italic">Dialogues of the Dead</hi> without feeling that there
is a deeper and more serious vein in Lucian than he would
confess? Although he poured his contempt upon the Cynic
street preachers, although in the <hi rend="italic">Auction of Lives</hi> the Cynic’s
sells for the most paltry price, the Cynic alone is allowed to
carry with him across the river of death his characteristic
qualities, his boldness and freedom of speech, his bitter
laughter at the follies and illusions of mankind.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Auct.</hi> 11; <hi rend="italic">Traj.</hi> 24;
<hi rend="italic">Dial. Mort.</hi> x. 9.</note> There
are many indications in these dialogues that, if Lucian had
turned Cynic preacher, he would have waged the same war on
the pleasures and illusory ambitions of man, he would have
outdone the Cynics in brutal frankness of exposure and denunciation,
as he would have surpassed them in rhetorical and
imaginative charm of style.<note place="foot">Cf. Luc. <hi rend="italic">Char.</hi> 15, 20; <hi rend="italic">Dial. Mort.</hi>
i. 3; <hi rend="italic">Somn.</hi> 21.</note> He has a vivid and awful conception
of Death, the great leveller, and sees all earthly wealth
and glory in the grey light of the land where all things are
forgotten. Rank and riches, beauty and strength, the lust of
the eye and the pride of life, are all left behind on the borders
of the realm of <q>sapless heads.</q><note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Traj.</hi> 15; <hi rend="italic">Necyom.</hi> 12.</note> If Lucian has any gospel it
is that the kingdom of heaven belongs to the poor. He is as
ready as some of the Christian Fathers to condemn the rich
eternally.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Traj.</hi> 19; <hi rend="italic">Cyn.</hi> 7; <hi rend="italic">Menip.</hi> 11,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">χωρὶς δὲ οἵ τε πλούσιοι προσῄεσαν ὠχροί κτλ.</foreign> Cf. <hi rend="italic">Somn.</hi> 14, 15,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἱ δὲ (πλούσιοι) εὖ ἴσθι πολὺ ὑμῶν ἀθλιώτερον τὸν βίον βιοῦσι</foreign>, cf. 22.</note> And therefore we are not surprised that Lucian
has little eye for the splendour of his age, unless indeed in
<pb n="338"/><anchor id="Pg338"/>the phrase, <q>Great cities die as well as men.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Char.</hi> 23,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀποθνήσκουσι γάρ, ὦ πορθμεῦ, καὶ πόλεις ὥσπερ ἄνθρωποι</foreign>.</note> He seems to
have little appreciation for its real services to humanity. Its
vain, pretentious philosophy, its selfishness of wealth, its vices
hidden under the guise of virtue, drew down his hatred and
scorn. Yet one cannot help feeling, in reading some of Lucian’s
pieces, that, man of genius as he was, a man of no age, or a
man of all ages, he is looking at human life from far above,
with no limitations of time, and passing a judgment which
may be repeated in the thirtieth century.<note place="foot">As in <hi rend="italic">Icaromen.</hi> 15; <hi rend="italic">Char.</hi> 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
This lofty or airy detachment in regarding the toils and
ambitions of men is perhaps best seen in the <hi rend="italic">Charon</hi>. In this
piece Lucian shows us the ideal spectator taking an outlook
over the scene of human life. The ferryman of the dead,
who has heard so many laments from his passengers for the
joys they have lost, wishes to have a glance at this upper
world which it seems so hard to leave behind. He joins
the company of Hermes, and, by an old-world miracle, they
gain an observatory on high-piled Thessalian mountains from
which to watch for a while the comedy or the tragedy of
human life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Char.</hi> 3; cf. a saying of Plato,
quoted in M. Aurel. vii. 48, <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ δὴ περὶ ἀνθρώπων τοὺς λόγους ποιούμενον ἐπισκοπεῖν δεῖ καὶ
<anchor id="corr338"/><corr sic="τά">τὰ</corr> ἐπίγεια, ὥσπερ ποθὲν ἄνωθεν, κατὰ ἀγέλας ...
    γάμους, γενέσεις, θανάτους, δικαστηρίων θόρυβον, ἑορτάς, θρήνους, κτλ.</foreign></note> A magic verse of Homer gives the spectral
visitor the power to observe the scene so far below. And
what a sight it is! It is a confused spectacle of various effort
and passion—men sailing, fighting, ploughing, lending at usury,
suing in the law-courts. It is also a human swarm stinging
and being stung. And over all the scene flits a confused cloud
of hopes and fears and follies and hatreds, the love of pleasure
and the love of gold. Higher still, you may see the eternal
Fates spinning for each one of the motley crowd his several
thread. One man, raised high for the moment, has a resounding
fall; another, mounting but a little way, sinks unperceived.
And amidst all the tumult and excitement of their hopes and
alarms, death kindly snatches them away by one of his many
messengers. Yet they weep and lament, forgetting that they
have been mere sojourners for a brief space upon earth and
are only losing the pleasures of a dream.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Char.</hi> 17,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀπίασιν ὥσπερ ἐξ ὀνείρατος πάντα ὑπὲρ γῆς ἀφέντες</foreign>.</note> To Charon the
bubbles in a fountain are the truest image of their phantom
<pb n="339"/><anchor id="Pg339"/>life—some forming and bursting speedily, others swelling out
for a little longer and more showy life, but all bursting at the
last. Charon is so moved by the pathos of it all, that, from
his mountain peaks, he would fain preach a sermon to the silly
crowd and warn them of the doom which is in store for all.
But the wiser or more cynical Hermes tells him that all
except a few have their ears more closely stopped than the
crew of Odysseus when they passed the Siren isles.
</p>

<p>
This view of human life, half-contemptuous, half-pathetic,
which the great iconoclast of all the dreams of religion or
philosophy in his time has sketched with his own graphic
power, was the view of the very philosophy which he derided.
Philosophy had a second time turned from heaven to earth.
The effort to solve the riddle of the universe by a single
formula, or by the fine-drawn subtleties of dialectic, has been
abandoned. In Lucian’s <hi rend="italic">Auction of Lives</hi>, in which the merits
of the various schools are balanced and estimated in terms
of cash, it is significant that only a slight and perfunctory
reference is made to the great cosmic or metaphysical theories
of Elea or Ionia, to the Pythagorean doctrine of numbers, to
the Ephesian doctrine of the eternal flow, or the ideal system
of Plato.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Auct.</hi> 3, 13, 16.</note> We have seen that, although Seneca has a certain
interest in the logic and physics of the older Stoicism, he
makes all purely speculative inquiry ancillary to moral progress.
The same diversion of interest from the field of speculation to
that of conduct is seen even more decidedly in Epictetus and
M. Aurelius.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iv. i. 138,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἆρον ἐκεῖνα τὰ τῶν σχολαστικῶν καὶ τῶν μωρῶν κτλ.</foreign> M. Aurel. vii. 67; cf. Zeller,
<hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2, p. 203; Hatch,
<hi rend="italic">Hibbert Lec.</hi> p. 142.</note> The philosophic Emperor had, of course, studied
the great cosmic systems of Heraclitus and Epicurus, Plato
and Aristotle.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vi. 15; vii. 19; vi. 24, 42,
47; viii 6; xi. 20; viii. 3; vii. 67.</note> They furnish a scenery or background, sometimes,
especially that of Heraclitus, a dimly-seen foundation,
for his theory of conduct. But, in spite of his sad, weary view
of the pettiness and sameness of the brief space of consciousness
between <q>the two eternities,</q> the whole thought of M.
Aurelius is concentrated on the manner in which that brief
moment may be worthily spent. So, Epictetus asks, What do
I care whether all things are composed of atoms or similar
parts or of fire or earth? Is it not enough to know the
<pb n="340"/><anchor id="Pg340"/>nature of good and evil?<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> 175; cf. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 21,
§ 23,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλά, εἴ σε ψυχαγωγεῖ τὰ θεωρήματα, καθήμενος αὐτὰ στρέφε
αὐτὸς ἐπὶ σεαυτοῦ· φιλόσοφον δὲ μηδέποτ’ εἴπῃς σεαυτόν</foreign>:
cf. M. Aurel. ii. 17,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τοῦ ἀνθρωπίνου βίου ὁ μὲν χρόνος στιγμή ... τί οὖν τὸ παραπέμψαι
δυνάμενον; ἓν καὶ μόνον, φιλοσοφία</foreign>.</note> Just as in the days of Socrates
the whole stress of philosophy is directed towards the discovery
of a rule of life, a source of moral clearness and guidance,
with a view to the formation or reformation of character.
</p>

<p>
Seneca and Epictetus and Lucian and M. Aurelius all alike
give a gloomy picture of the moral condition of the masses.
And we may well believe that, in spite of the splendour of
that age, in spite of a great moral movement which was stirring
among the leaders of society, the mass of men, as in every age,
had little taste for idealist views of life. Yet Seneca, notwithstanding
his pessimism, speaks of the multitudes who were
stretching out their hands for moral help. There must have
been some demand for that popular moral teaching which is a
striking feature of the time. Men might jeer at the philosophic
missionary, but they seem to have crowded to listen to him—on
the temple steps of Rome or Ephesus, in the great squares
of Alexandria,<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> v. 26; D.
Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxii.</note> or in the colonnades at Olympia, or under the
half-ruined walls of an old Milesian colony on the Euxine.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 41; iv.
24; D. Chrys. xxxvi, § 17.</note>
The rush of the porters and smiths and carpenters to join the
ranks of the Cynic friars, which moved the scorn of Lucian,<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Fug.</hi> c. 12.</note> must
have corresponded to some general demand, even if the motive
of the vagrant missionary was not of the purest kind. There
must have been many an example of moral earnestness like
that of Hermotimus, who had laboured hard for twenty years
to find the true way of life, and had only obtained a distant
glimpse of the celestial city.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hermot.</hi> c. 2, 25.</note> After Dion’s conversion, as we
may fairly call it, he deems it a sacred duty to call men to the
way of wisdom by persuasion or reproach, and to appeal even
to the turbulent masses.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> lxxviii.; Martha,
<hi rend="italic">Mor. sous L’Emp. rom.</hi> p. 300.</note> We shall see how well he fulfilled
the duty. For nearly a century at Athens, the gentle Demonax
embodied the ideal which his friend Epictetus had
formed of the Cynic father of all men in God; and his immense
ascendency testifies at least to a widespread respect and
admiration for such teaching and example.<note place="foot">Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 7, 8.</note> It is not necessary
<pb n="341"/><anchor id="Pg341"/>to suppose that the people who thought it an honour if
Demonax invited himself to their tables, the magistrates who
rose up to do him reverence as he passed, or the riotous
assembly which was awed into stillness by his mere presence,
were people generally who had caught his moral enthusiasm.<note place="foot">Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 63.</note>
They were at the very time eager to have gladiatorial shows
established under the shadow of the Acropolis. But it is something
when men begin to revere a character inspired by moral
forces of which they have only a dim conjecture. And amid all
the material splendour and apparent content of the Antonine age,
there were signs that men were becoming conscious of a great
spiritual need, which they often tried to satisfy by accumulated
superstitions. The ancient routine was broken up; the forms
of ancestral piety no longer satisfied even the vulgar; the forms
of ancient scholastic speculation had become stale and frigid
to the cultivated; the old philosophies had left men bewildered.
Henceforth, philosophy must make itself a religion; the philosopher
must become an <q>ambassador of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There is no philosophy without virtue; there is no virtue
without philosophy,</q> said Seneca,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 89, § 6; cf. A. Gell. xvii.
19, 4.</note> and herein he expressed truly
the most earnest thought of his own age and the next. Lucian,
in the dialogue which is perhaps his most powerful exposure of
the failure of philosophy, bears testimony to the boundless expectations
which it aroused in its votaries. Hermotimus, the
elderly enthusiast, whom the mocker meets hurrying with his
books to the philosophic school, has been an ardent student for
twenty years; he has grown pale and withered with eager
thought. Yet he admits that he has only taken a single step on
the steep upward road. Few and faint and weary are they who
ever reach the summit.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Hermot.</hi> c. 5.</note> Yet Hermotimus is content if, at the
close of the efforts of a lifetime, he should, if but for a moment,
breathe the air of the far-off heights and look down on the
human ant-hill below. Such spirits dream of an apotheosis like
that which crowned the hero on Mount Oeta, when the soul
shall be purged of its earthly passions as by fire, and hardly a
memory of the illusions of the past will remain.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 7,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ οὗτοι δὴ ὑπὸ φιλοσοφίας ὥσπερ ὑπό τινος πυρὸς ἅπαντα ταῦτα
περιαιρεθέντες κτλ.</foreign></note> Lycinus, his
friend, has once himself had a vision of a celestial city, from
<pb n="342"/><anchor id="Pg342"/>which ambition and the greed of gold are banished, where there
is no discord or strife, but the citizens live in a deep peace of
sober virtue. He had once heard from an aged man how any
one might share its citizenship, rich or poor, bond or free, Greek
or barbarian, if only he had the passion for nobleness and were
not overcome by the hardness of the journey. And the sceptic
avows that long since he would have enrolled himself among
its citizens, but the city is far off, and only dimly visible.
The paths which are said to lead to it run in the most various
directions, through soft meadows and cool shaded slopes, or
mounting over bare rough crags under a pitiless blaze. And
at the entrance to each avenue there is a clamorous crowd of
guides, each vaunting his peculiar skill, abusing his rivals, and
pointing to the one sure access of which he alone has the
secret key. A similar scene, equally illustrative of the moral
ferment of the time, is sketched in another charming piece.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Bis Acc.</hi> c. 11.</note>
It is that in which the rustic Pan, with his memories of the
shepherd’s pipe and the peace of Arcadian pastures, describes
the strange turmoil of contending sects which rings around his
cave on the edge of the Acropolis. There, in the Agora below,
rival teachers, with dripping brow and distended veins, are
shouting one another down before an admiring crowd. And
the simple old deity, to whom the language of their dialectic
is strange, seems to think that the victory rests with the loudest
voice and the most blatant self-assertion.
</p>

<p>
The sly ridicule of Lucian, so often crossed by a touch
of pathos, is perhaps the best testimony to the overpowering
interest which his age felt in the philosophy of conduct. And
it was no longer the pursuit merely of an intellectual aristocracy.
Common, ignorant folk have caught the passion for apostleship.
Everywhere might be met the familiar figure, with long
cloak and staff and scrip, haranguing in the squares or lanes to
unlettered crowds.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 6,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἁπανταχοῦ πώγων βαθὺς καὶ βιβλίον ἐν <sic>τῃ ἀριστερᾳ</sic> καὶ πάντες ὑπὲρ
σοῦ φιλοσοφοῦσι κτλ.</foreign></note> And the preacher is often as unlearned as
they, having left the forge or the carpenter’s bench or the slave
prison,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Fug.</hi> c. 12; <hi rend="italic">Vit. Auct.</hi> c. 10; D.
Chrys. xxxii. 9; xxxiv. 3.</note> to proclaim his simple gospel of renunciation, with
more or less sincerity. Lucian makes sport of the quarrels
and contradictions of the schools. And it is true that the old
<pb n="343"/><anchor id="Pg343"/>names still marked men off in different camps, or rather
churches. But their quarrels in Lucian and in Philostratus<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> v. 37.</note>
seem to be personal, the offspring of very unphilosophic
ambition and jealousy, or greed or petty vanity, rather than the
wholesome and stimulating collision of earnest minds contending
for what they think a great system of truth. The rival
Sophists under the Acropolis were quarrelling for an audience
and not for a dogma. Scientific interest in philosophy was to
a great extent dead. For centuries no great original thinker
had arisen to rekindle it. And in the purely moral sphere
to which philosophy was now confined, the natural tendency of
the different schools, not even excluding the Epicurean, was
to assimilation and eclecticism.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
483. Renan, <hi rend="italic">Les Év.</hi> p. 384, les différences
des écoles étaient à peu près
effacées. Un éclecticisme superficie
était à la mode.</note> They were all impartially
endowed at the university of Athens, and a youth of enthusiasm
would attend the professors of all the schools. Apollonius,
although he finally adopted the Pythagorean discipline, pursued
his studies at Aegae under Platonists and Stoics,<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 7.</note> and even under
Epicureans. Seneca came under Pythagorean influences in his
youth, and he constantly rounds off a letter to Lucilius with
a quotation from Epicurus. Among the tutors of M. Aurelius
were the Peripatetic Claudius Severus, and Sextus the Platonist
of Chaeronea.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. 3.</note> Hence, although a man in the second century
might be labelled Platonist or Stoic, Cynic or Pythagorean, it
would often be difficult from his moral teaching to discover
his philosophic ancestry and affinities. And, just as in modern
Christendom, although sectarian landmarks and designations are
kept up, the popular preaching of nearly all the sects tends to a
certain uniformity of emphasis on a limited number of momentous
moral truths, so the preaching of pagan philosophy dwells, almost
to weariness, on the same eternal principles of true gain and loss,
of the illusions of passion, of freedom through renunciation.
</p>

<p>
The moral teaching or preaching of the Antonine age
naturally adapted its tone to the tastes of its audience; there
was the discourse of the lecture-room, and the ruder and
more boisterous appeal to the crowd. Both passed under the
name of philosophy, and both often degraded that great name
by an affectation and insincerity which cast discredit on a
<pb n="344"/><anchor id="Pg344"/>great and beneficent movement of reform. The philosophic
lecturer who has a serious moral purpose is in theory distinguished
from the rhetorical sophist, who trades in startling
effects, who rejoices in displaying his skill on any subject
however trivial or grotesque, who will expatiate on the gnat or
the parrot, or debate the propriety of a Vestal’s marriage.<note place="foot">Martha, <hi rend="italic">Moralistes sous l’Emp.</hi> p.
275; Capes, <hi rend="italic">Univ. Life</hi>, p. 58 sqq.</note> The
exercises of the rhetorical school had gone on for five hundred
years, and, with momentous effects on Roman culture, they
were destined to continue with little change till the Goths
were masters of Rome.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Roman Society in the Last Century
of the Western Empire</hi> (1st ed.), p. 355.</note> The greed, the frivolity, and the
overweening vanity of these intellectual acrobats are a
commonplace of literary history.<note place="foot">Capes, <hi rend="italic">Univ. Life</hi>, p. 69.</note> The sophist and the
lecturing philosopher were theoretically distinct. But unfortunately
a mass of evidence goes to show that in many
cases the lecturing philosopher became a mere showy rhetorician.
A similar desecration of a serious mission is not
unknown in modern times. The fault is often not with the
preacher, but with his audience. If people come not to be
made better, but to be amused, to have their ears soothed by
flowing declamation, to have a shallow intellectual curiosity
titillated by cheap displays of verbal subtlety or novelty,
the unfortunate preacher will often descend to the level of
his audience. And in that ancient world, according to the
testimony of Seneca, Musonius, Plutarch, and Epictetus, the
philosophic preacher too often was tempted to win a vulgar
applause by vulgar rhetorical arts.<note place="foot">Epict. ii. 19; iii. 23; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Recta
Rat. Aud.</hi> vii. viii.; A. Gell. v. i.;
Zeller, iii. 1, p. 657.</note> He was sometimes a
man of no very serious purpose, with little real science or
originality. He had been trained in the school of rhetoric,
which abhorred all serious thought, and deified the master of
luscious periods and ingenious turns of phrase. He was,
besides, too often a mere vain and mercenary adventurer, trading
on an attenuated stock of philosophic tradition, and a boundless
command of a versatile rhetoric, cultivating intellectual
insolence as a fine art, yet with a servile craving for the
applause of his audience.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 3.</note> Many a scene in the now faded
history of their failures or futile triumphs comes down to us
<pb n="345"/><anchor id="Pg345"/>from Plutarch and Epictetus and Philostratus.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. iv.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἔθελγε τῇ τε ἠχῇ τοῦ φθέγματος καὶ τῷ ῥυθμῷ τῆς γλώττης</foreign>. A. Gell. v. 1, 3; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 6, non id agunt ut aliqua illo
vitia deponant sed ut oblectamento
aurium perfruantur. Cf. Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 7.</note> Sometimes
the gaps upon the benches, the listless, inattentive air, the
slow feeble applause, sent the vain preacher home with gloomy
fears for his popularity. On other days, he was lifted to the
seventh heaven by an enthusiastic genteel mob, who followed
every deft turn of expression with shouts and gestures of delight,
and far-fetched preciosities of approbation. At the close, the
philosophic performer goes about among his admirers to
receive their renewed tribute. <q>Well, what did you think of
me?</q>—<q>Quite marvellous, I swear by all that is dear to me.</q>—<q>But
how did you like the passage about Pan and the
nymphs?</q>—<q>Oh, superlative!</q> It is thus that a real winner
of souls describes the impostor.<note place="foot">Epict. iii. 23,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ ἐπαίνεσόν με· εἰπέ μοι Ούᾶ καὶ Θαυμαστῶς</foreign>.  Plut.
<hi rend="italic">De Recta Rat. Aud.</hi> c. viii.; cf. Hatch,
<hi rend="italic">Hibbert Lec.</hi> p. 95.</note> Even estimable teachers did
not disdain to add to the effect of their lectures by carefully
polished eloquence, an exquisite toilet, and a cultivated dignity.
Such a courtly philosopher was Euphrates, the Syrian Stoic,
whose acquaintance Pliny had made during his term of service in
the East. Euphrates was stately and handsome, with flowing
hair and beard, and a demeanour which excited reverence without
overawing the hearer.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 10.</note> Irreproachable in his own life, he
condemned sin, but was merciful to the sinner. Pliny, the
amiable man of the world, who had no serious vices to reform,
found Euphrates a charming lecturer, with a subtle and ornate
style which was entirely to his taste. He treats Euphrates as
a rhetorician rather than as a philosopher with a solemn
message to deliver. To serious moralists like Seneca, Musonius,
Plutarch, and Epictetus the showy professor of the art of
arts was an offence. With their lofty conception of the task
of practical philosophy, they could only feel contempt or
indignation for the polished exquisite who trimmed or inflated
his periods to please the ears of fashionable audiences. They all
condemn such performances in almost identical terms. The
mission of true philosophy is to make men examine themselves,
to excite shame and pain and penitence, to reveal a law of life
and moral freedom which may lead to amendment and peace.<note place="foot">Epict. iii. 21; ii. 1; ii. 23; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 6.</note>
<pb n="346"/><anchor id="Pg346"/><q>There is no good in a bath or in a discourse which does not
cleanse.</q> The true disciple and the true teacher will be too
much absorbed in the gravity of the business to think of the
pleasure of mere style. To make aesthetic effect the object of
such discourses, when the fate of character is at stake, is to
turn the school into a theatre or a music-hall, the philosopher
into a flute-player.<note place="foot">A. Gell. v. 1, 2, tum scias neque
illi philosophum loqui sed tibicinem
canere. Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> iii. 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ῥυθμούς τε ποικιλωτέρους αὐλοῦ καὶ λύρου ἐσηγάγετο ἐς τὸν λόγον</foreign>. D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
xxxv. §§ 7, 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
The volume and unanimity of these criticisms of the rhetorical
philosopher show that such men abounded; but they also
show that there must have been a great mass of serious teachers
whom they travestied. It has perhaps been too little recognised
that in the first and second centuries there was a great propaganda
of pagan morality running parallel to the evangelism
of the Church.<note place="foot">For a comparative estimate see
Capes, <hi rend="italic">Univ. Life in Ancient Athens</hi>,
p. 90; Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hibbert Lec.</hi> p. 105.</note> The preaching was of very different kinds,
according to the character of the audiences. The preachers,
as we have said, belonged to all the different schools, Stoic or
Platonist, Cynic or Pythagorean; sometimes, like Dion, they
owed little academic allegiance at all. Sometimes the preaching
approached to modern conceptions of its office;<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 3; iv. 42;
D. Chrys. xxxiii. § 28; xxxiv. § 4; xl.
§ 31.</note> at others, it
dealt with subjects and used a style unknown to our pulpits.<note place="foot">Cf. A. Gell. xii. 1, nihil, inquit,
dubito quin filium lacte suo nutritura
sit.</note>
The life of Apollonius of Tyana may be a romance; it
certainly contains many narratives of miracles and wonders
which cast a suspicion upon its historical value. Yet even
a romance must have real facts behind to give it probability,
and the preaching, at least, of Apollonius seems to belong to
the world of reality. Apollonius was probably much nearer
to the true ecclesiastic and priest of modern times than any
ancient preacher. He had been trained in all the philosophies;
he had drunk inspiration from the fountain of all spiritual
religion, the East. He was both a mystic and a ritualist. He
rejoiced in converse with the Brahmans, and he occupied
himself with the revival or reform of the ritual in countless
Greek and Italian temples.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iii. 41 sqq.;
iv. 24; iv. 18, 20; i. 11; i. 31.</note> He had an immense and curious
faith in ancient legend.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 13, 16, 19, 20, 33; vi. 40.</note> The man who could busy himself
<pb n="347"/><anchor id="Pg347"/>with the restoration of the true antique form of an obsolete
rite at Eleusis or Athens or Dodona, also held conceptions of
prayer and sacrifice and mystic communion with God, which
might seem irreconcilable with any rigidly formal worship.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> v. 25,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ δὲ τῶν ταύρων αἷμα καὶ ὁπόσα ἐθύετο, οὐκ
ἐπῄνει τὰ τοιάδε, κτλ.</foreign></note>
The ritualist was also the preacher of a higher morality. From
the steps of the temples he used to address great audiences on
their conspicuous faults, as Dion did after him. In the parable
of the sparrow who by his twitter called his brethren to a heap
of spilt grain, he taught the people of Ephesus the duty of
brotherly helpfulness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 3.</note> He found Smyrna torn by factious
strife, and he preached a rivalry of public spirit.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 8.</note> Even at
Olympia, before a crowd intent on the strife of racers and
boxers and athletes, he discoursed on wisdom and courage
and temperance.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 31.</note> At Rome, under the tyranny of Nero, he
moved from temple to temple exciting a religious revival by
his preaching.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 41.</note> One text, perhaps, contains a truth for all
generations—<q>My prayer before the altars is—Grant me, ye
Gods, what is my due.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 11; iv. 40,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὦδε εὔχομαι, ὦ θεοὶ δοίητέ μοι τὰ ὀφειλόμενα</foreign>.</note> What effect on the masses such
preaching had we cannot tell—who can tell at any time? But
there are well-attested cases of individual conversion under
pagan preaching. Polemon, the son of a rich Athenian, was
a very dissolute youth who squandered his wealth on low
pleasure. Once, coming from some revel, he burst with his
companions into the lecture room of Xenocrates, who happened
to be discoursing on temperance. Xenocrates calmly continued
his remarks. The tipsy youth listened for a while,
then flung away his garland, and with it also his evil ways;<note place="foot">Diog. Laert. iv. 3, 1,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καί ποτε ... μεθύων καὶ ἐστεφανωμένος εἰς τὴν Ξενοκράτους ᾖξε σχολήν κτλ.</foreign>: Epict.
iii. 1, § 14; Hor. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> ii. 3, 253, quaero,
faciasne, quod olim Mutatus Polemon?
Cf. the conversion of Isaeus, Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 217.</note>
he became the head of the Academy. A similar change was
wrought by the teaching of Apollonius on a debauched youth
of Corcyra, which we need not doubt although it was accompanied
by a miracle.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 20; cf.
i. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
Musonius, another preacher, was a younger contemporary
of Apollonius. His fame as an apostle of the philosophic life
aroused the suspicions of Nero, and he was exiled to Gyarus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 16; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 71;
D. Cass. lxii. 27.</note>
<pb n="348"/><anchor id="Pg348"/>The suspicion may have been confirmed by his intimacy
with Rubellius Plautus and great Stoics like Thrasea.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 71; xiv. 59; Epict.
i. 1, 27. The Rufus is Musonius Rufus.</note> He
met with gentler treatment under the Flavians,<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxvi. 13,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντας τοὺς φιλοσόφους ὁ Οὐεσπασιανὸς πλὴν τοῦ Μουσωνίου
ἐκ τῆς Ῥώμης ἐξέβαλε</foreign>.</note> and he probably
saw the reign of Trajan. He is not known to have written
anything. The fragments of his teaching in Stobaeus are
probably drawn from notes of his lectures, as the teaching of
Epictetus has been preserved by Arrian. Musonius is not a
speculative philosopher but a physician of souls. Philosophy
is the way to goodness: goodness is the goal of philosophy.
And philosophy is not the monopoly of an intellectual caste;
it is a matter of precept and practice, not of theory. The true
moral teacher, working on the germ of virtue which there
is in each human soul, thinking only of reforming his disciples,
and nothing of applause, may win them to his ideal. Musonius
fortified the austere Stoic and Cynic precepts by the ascetic
discipline of the Pythagorean school. He taught the forgiveness
of injuries and gentleness to wrongdoers. He is one of the few
in the ancient world who have a glimpse of a remote ideal
of sexual virtue. While his ascetic principles do not lead him
to look askance at honourable marriage, he denounces all
unchastity, and demands equal virtue in man and woman.<note place="foot">Zeller. <hi rend="italic">Phil. der
    <anchor id="corr348"/><corr sic="Greich.">Griech.</corr></hi> iii. 1,
pp. 651-658.</note>
He was, according to Epictetus, a searching preacher. He spoke
to the conscience, so that each hearer felt as if his own faults
were set before his eyes. His name will go down for ever in the
pages of Tacitus. When the troops of Vespasian and Vitellius
were fighting in the lanes and gardens under the walls of Rome,
Musonius joined the envoys of the Senate, and at the risk of
his life harangued the infuriated soldiery on the blessings of
peace and the horrors of civil war.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 81.</note> Many of the moral
treatises of Plutarch are probably redacted from notes of
lectures delivered in Rome. As we shall see in a later chapter,
Plutarch is rather a moral director and theologian than a
preacher. But his wide knowledge of human nature, his keen
analysis of character and motive and human weakness, his
spiritual discernment in discovering remedies and sources of
strength, above all his lofty moral ideal, would have made him
a powerful preacher in any age of the world. But it is in
<pb n="349"/><anchor id="Pg349"/>the discourses of Maximus of Tyre that we have perhaps the
nearest approach in antiquity to our conception of the sermon.
Probably if any of us were asked to explain that conception,
he might say that a sermon was founded on some definite idea
of the relation of man to the Infinite Spirit, that its object
was, on the one hand, to bring man into communion with God,
and, on the other, to teach him his duty to his fellowmen and
to himself. The discourses of Maximus have all these
characteristics. Maximus of Tyre is little known now, and
although to the historian of thought and moral life he is
attractive, he has not the strength of a great personality. Yet,
along with Plutarch, he shows us paganism at its best, striving
to reform itself, groping after new sources of spiritual strength,
trying to wed new and purer spiritual ideals to the worn-out
mythology of the past. Maximus is very much in the position
of one of our divines who finds himself bound in duty to edify
the spiritual life of his flock, without disowning the religious
traditions of the past, and without refusing to accept the ever-broadening
revelation of God. Some of his discourses may
seem to us frigid and scholastic, with a literary rather than
a religious interest. But in others, there is a combination of a
systematic theology with a mystic fervour and a moral purpose,
which seems hardly to belong to the ancient world.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. v. viii. §§ 3, 10; xi.;
xiv. § 8; xvii. For the little known
of him, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii.
2. p. 182, n. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
In his oration to the Alexandrians,<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxii. § 9,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὗτοι δὲ (οἱ Κυνικοὶ) ἔν τε τριόδοις καὶ στενωποῖς καὶ πυλῶσιν ἱερῶν
ἀγείρουσι καὶ ἀπατῶσι παιδάρια καὶ ναύτας, κτλ.</foreign></note> Dion Chrysostom speaks
with unwonted asperity of the Cynics, haranguing with coarse
buffoonery a gaping crowd in the squares and alleys or in the
porches of the temples. He thinks that these men are doing
no good, but rather bringing the name of philosophy into
contempt. It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that
this view of the Cynic profession was very general in that age.
The vulgar Cynic, with his unkempt beard, his mantle, wallet,
and staff, his filth and rudeness and obscenity, insulting every
passer-by with insolent questions, exchanging coarse jests and
jeers with the vagabond mob which gathers at his approach,
is the commonest figure in Greek and Roman literature of the
time. The <q>mendicant monks</q> of paganism have been painted
with all the vices of the dog and ape by Martial and Petronius
<pb n="350"/><anchor id="Pg350"/>and Seneca, by Dion and Athenaeus and Alciphron and
Epictetus, above all by Lucian.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 5, § 1; 29, § 1; Mart. iv.
53, cum baculo peraque senem ... cui
dat latratos obvia turba cibos; Epict.
iii. 22; D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxiv. § 2;
Athen. iii. 113; Petron. 14; Aleiphr.
iii. 55; Caspari, <hi rend="italic">De Cynicis</hi>, p. 10.</note> The great foe of all extravagance
or enthusiasm in religion and philosophy fastened on
the later followers of Diogenes with peculiar bitterness. His
hostility, we may surmise, is directed not against their tenets,
but their want of decent culture. In the <hi rend="italic">Banquet</hi>, the Cynic
Alcidamas is drawn with a coarse vigour of touch which is
intended to match the coarseness of the subject. He bursts
into the dinner-party of Aristaenetus uninvited, to the terror
of the company, ranges about the room, snatching tit-bits
from the dishes as they pass him, and finally sinks down
upon the floor beside a mighty flagon of strong wine. He
drinks to the bride in no elegant fashion, challenges the
jester to fight, and, when the lamp is extinguished in the
obscene tumult, is finally found trying to embrace the
dancing girl.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Conviv.</hi> c. 16, 35, etc.</note> But Lucian’s bitterest attack on the class is
perhaps delivered in the dialogue entitled the <hi rend="italic">Fugitives</hi>.
Philosophy, in the form of a woman bathed in tears, appears
before the Father of the gods. That kindly potentate is
affected by her grief, and inquires the cause of it. Philosophy,
who had been commissioned by Zeus to bring healing and
peace to human life in all its confusion and ignorance and
violence, then unfolds the tale of her wrongs.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Fug.</hi> c. 5, 15.</note> It is a
picture of vulgar pretence, by which her fair name has been
besmirched and disgraced. Observing the love and reverence
which her true servants may win from men, a base crew of
ignorant fellows, trained in the lowest handicrafts, have forsaken
them, to assume the garb and name of her real followers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 12,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">κατεῖδον τὴν αἰδῶ ὅση παρὰ τῶν πολλῶν ἐστι τοῖς ἑταίροις τοῖς ἐμοῖς, ...
    ταῦτα πάντα τυραννίδα οὐ μικρὰν ἡγοῦντο εἶναι</foreign>.</note>
It is a pleasant change from a life of toil and danger and
hardship, to an easy vagabond existence, nor is the transformation
difficult. A cloak and a club, a loud voice and a
brazen face and a copious vocabulary of scurrilous abuse,
these are all the necessary equipment. Impudent assurance
has its usual success with the crowd, who are unable to see
through the disguise. If any one attempts to challenge the
<pb n="351"/><anchor id="Pg351"/>claims of the impostors, he is answered with a blow or a taunt.
And thus by terrorism or deceit, they usurp the respect which
is due to the real philosopher, and manage to live in plenty and
even in luxury. Nor is this the worst. For these pretended
ascetics, who profess to scorn delights, and to endure all
manner of hardness, are really coarse common sensualists,
who go about corrupting and seducing. Many of them heap
up a fortune in their wanderings, and then bid farewell to scrip
and cloak and the tub of Diogenes. And so plain unlearned
men come to regard the very name of philosophy with hatred
and contempt, and all her work is undone, like another
Penelope’s web.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Fug.</hi> c. 17-21,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἱ ἰδιῶται δὲ ταῦτα ὁρῶντες καταπτύουσιν ἤδη φιλοσοφίας, κτλ.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
Even the stoutest defender of the Cynic movement, as a
whole, feels constrained to admit that the charges against the
Cynics were, perhaps, in many cases, true.<note place="foot">Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Die Kyniker</hi>, p. 39<sic>.</sic>
Roheit und arbeitsscheues Vagabundenthum ... mussten die Kynische
Lebensweise sehr bequem finden.</note> It was a movement
peculiarly attractive to the lawless, restless hangers-on
of society, who found in an open defiance of social restraints
and a wandering existence, a field of licence and a chance of
gain. Some of the great Cynics, indeed, were interested in
physical speculation, and were widely cultivated men.<note place="foot">Plut. (?) <hi rend="italic">De Plac. Phil.</hi> ii. 8; iv. 5;
Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Demon.</hi> 4,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ποιηταῖς σύντροφος ἐγένετο ... καὶ τὰς ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ προαιρέσεις ...
    ἠπίστατο</foreign>: cf. Caspari,
<hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 6; Zeller, iii. 1, p. 685.</note> But
the Cynic movement, as a whole, rested on no scientific tradition,
and the most serious and effective preacher of its doctrine
needed only a firm hold of a few simple truths, with a command
of seizing and incisive phrase.<note place="foot">Cf. Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> 14 sqq.; Caspari,
p. 6.</note> There was no professional
barrier to exclude the ignorant and corrupt pretender.
For the Cynics, from the very nature of their mission and
their aims, never formed an organised school or society.
Each went his own way in complete detachment. To the
superficial observer, the only common bond and characteristic
were the purely external marks of dress and rough
bearing and ostentatious contempt for the most ordinary
comforts and decencies of life, which could easily be assumed
by the knave and the libertine. Hence, as time went on,
although good Cynics, like Demonax or Demetrius, acquired
a deserved influence, yet the greed, licentiousness, and brutal
<pb n="352"/><anchor id="Pg352"/>violence of others brought great discredit on the name.
Epictetus, who had a lofty ideal of the Cynic preacher
as an ambassador of God, lays bare the coarse vices of the
pretender to that high service with an unsparing hand.<note place="foot">Epict. iii. 22, § 80,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἰς τοὺς νῦν ἀποβλέπομεν τοὺς τραπεζῆας πυλαωροὺς κτλ.</foreign>,
    Luc. <hi rend="italic">Fug.</hi> 14,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ οὐ πολλῆς πραγματείας δεῖ τριβώνιον περιβαλέσθαι</foreign>.</note> It is
evident, however, that certain of the gravest imputations,
which had been developed by prurient imaginations, were, by
an unwholesome tradition, levelled at even the greatest and best
of the Cynics.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Ver. Hist.</hi> ii. 18; Athen. iv.
158; xiii. 588.</note> And S. Augustine, in referring to these foul
charges, affirms, with an honourable candour, that they could
not be truly made against the Cynics of his own day.<note place="foot">S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">Civ. D.</hi> xiv. 20, nemo
tamen eorum audet hoc facere.</note> Moreover,
the Roman nature never took very kindly, even in some
of the cultivated circles, to anything under the name of
philosophy.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> lxxii. 2; Pers. v.
189; Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 71; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> 4;
<hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 5; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 22; Quintil.
xi. 1, 35; xii. 2, 6.</note> Even M. Aurelius could not altogether disarm
the suspicion with which it was regarded. And the revolt of
Avidius Cassius was to some extent an outburst of impatience
with the doctrinaire spirit of the <hi rend="italic">philosopha anicula</hi>, as Cassius
dared to call him.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Avid. Cass.</hi> 1, § 8, in a
letter of Verus, te philosopham aniculam,
me luxuriosum morionem
vocat: cf. c. 14.</note> And there were many things in the Cynic
movement which specially tended to provoke the ordinary
man. It threw down the gauntlet to a materialised age. It
preached absolute renunciation of all social ties and duties, and
of all the pleasures and refinements with which that society
had surrounded itself. In an age which, even on its tomb-stones,
bears the stamp of a starched conventionality and
adherence to use and wont, the Cynic was a defiant rebel
against all social restraints. In an age which was becoming
ever more superstitious, he did not shrink from attacking the
faith in the gods, the efficacy of the mysteries, the credit of
the most ancient oracles.<note place="foot">Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Die Kyniker</hi>, p. 31, sie
sind die am reinsten deistische Sect,
welche das hellenisch-römische Alterthum
hervorgebracht hat.</note> And, finally, while philosophy in
general after Domitian found support and patronage at the
imperial court, no emperor gave his countenance to the Cynics
till the Syrian dynasty of the third century.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 30; cf. D. Cass. lxxvii. 19,
for the favours showered on the Cynic
Antiochus by Severus.</note> We have here
surely a sufficient accumulation of reasons for hesitating to
<pb n="353"/><anchor id="Pg353"/>accept the wholesale condemnation of a class of men who,
instead of disarming opposition, rather plumed themselves on
provoking it.
</p>

<p>
A good example of the merciless, and not altogether
scrupulous fashion in which the Cynics were handled by contemporaries
is to be found in Lucian’s piece on the death of
Peregrinus.<note place="foot">On Lucian’s <hi rend="italic">Peregrinus</hi>, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Caspari,
<hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 24 sq.; Bernays, p. 42 sqq.</note> Peregrinus was a native of Parium on the Propontis,
and a man of fortune. He loved to call himself
Proteus, and, indeed, the strange vicissitudes of his career
justified his assumption of the name.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 5, 10 sq.</note> On reaching manhood,
he wandered from land to land, and in Palestine he joined a
Christian brotherhood, in which he rose to a commanding
influence, which drew down the suspicion of the government,
and he was thrown for a time into prison.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 11, 12.</note> His persecution
called forth, as Lucian ungrudgingly admits, all the fearless
love and charity of the worshippers of <q>the crucified Sophist.</q>
Released by a philosophic governor of the type of Gallio, he
gave up the remnant of his paternal property, amounting to
fifteen talents, to his native city.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 14.</note> Peregrinus had already
assumed the peculiar dress of the Cynic, and set out on fresh
wanderings, having, from some difference on a point of ritual,
severed his connection with the Christian brotherhood. He
then came under the influence of an Egyptian ascetic and of
the mysticism of the East. In a visit to Italy he acquired
celebrity by his fierce invectives, which did not spare even
the blameless and gentle Antoninus Pius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 17, 18; cf. the rudeness of
Demetrius to Vespasian, Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi>
xiii.; D. Cass. lxvi. 13.</note> The Emperor himself
paid little heed to him, but the prefect of the city thought
that Rome could well spare such a philosopher, and Peregrinus
was obliged to return to the East. Henceforth Greece, and
especially Elis, was the scene of his labours. He abated
none of his energy, dealing out his denunciations impartially,
and not sparing even the philosophic millionaire Herodes
Atticus for providing the visitors to Olympia with the luxury
of pure water.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 19,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">κακῶς ἠγόρευεν ὡς καταθηλύναντα τοὺς Ἕλληνας</foreign>.</note> He even tried to stir up Greece to armed
revolt. His fame and power among the Cynic brotherhood
were at their height, or perhaps beginning to wane, when
<pb n="354"/><anchor id="Pg354"/>he conceived the idea of electrifying the world and giving a
demonstration of the triumph of philosophy even over death
by a self-immolation at Olympia. There, before the eyes of
men gathered from all quarters, like Heracles, the great Cynic
exemplar, on Mount Oeta, he resolved to depart in the blaze
and glory of the funeral pyre kindled by his own hand. And
perhaps some rare lettered Cynic brother set afloat a Sibylline
verse, such as abounded in those days, bidding men prepare to
revere another hero, soon to be enthroned along with Heracles
in the broad Olympus.
</p>

<p>
Such a career, ambiguous, perhaps, on the most charitable
construction, attracted the eye of the man who sincerely
believed, under all his persiflage, that both the religion and the
philosophy of the past were worn out, and were now being
merely exploited by coarse adventurers for gain or ambition.
Moreover, the Philoctetes of the Cynic Heracles, his pupil
Theagenes, was attracting great audiences in the Gymnasium
of Trajan at Rome.<note place="foot">Caspari, <hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 16; Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Luc. u. die Kyniker</hi>, p. 16.</note> The self-martyrdom of their chief
had given a fresh inspiration to the Cynic brotherhood.
Who knows but a legend may gather round his name, altars
may be raised to him, and the ancient glamour of the
<q>flashing Olympus</q> will lend itself to glorify the uncultivated
crew who profane the name of philosophy, and are an
offence to culture?
</p>

<p>
There is no mistaking the cold merciless spirit in which
Lucian, by his own avowal, addressed himself to the task of
exposing what he genuinely believed to be a feigned enthusiasm.
Even the lover of Lucian receives a kind of shock from
the occasional tone of almost cruel hardness in his treatment of
the Cynic apostle. When Lucian’s narrative of the youthful
enormities of Peregrinus is analysed, it is perceived that the
accuser is anonymous, and that other names and particulars
are carefully suppressed.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 54.</note> For the gravest charges of youthful
depravity no proof or authority is given; they seem to be the
offspring of that prurient gossip which can assail any character.
They are the charges which were freely bandied about in the
age of Pericles and M. Aurelius, in the age of Erasmus and the
age of Milton. There must have been something at least
<pb n="355"/><anchor id="Pg355"/>remarkable and fascinating, although marred by extravagance,<note place="foot">This offended Demonax, cf. Luc. (?)
<hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 21,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Περεγρῖνε οὐκ ἀνθρώπιζεις</foreign>.</note>
about the man who became a great leader and prophet among
the Christians of Palestine, and who was almost worshipped
as a god. When he was thrown into jail, their widows and
orphans watched by the gates; his jailers were bribed to admit
some of the brethren to console his solitude; large sums were
collected from the cities of Asia for his support and defence.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 13.</note>
The surrender of his paternal property to his native city, an
act of generosity which had many parallels in that age, is
attributed to no higher motive than the wish to hush up a
rumour that Peregrinus had murdered his father. The charge
apparently rested on nothing more substantial than malignant
gossip.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 10, 14, 37; Bernays, p. 54.</note> The migration of Peregrinus from the Christian to
the Cynic brotherhood was not so startling in that age as it
may appear to us. Transitions to and fro were not uncommon
between societies which had the common bond of asceticism
and contempt for the world.<note place="foot">Cf. Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xlvi. (Dind. vol. ii.
p. 402),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τοῖς ἐν τῇ Παλαιστίνῃ δυσσεβέσι παραπλήσιοι τοὺς τρόπους</foreign>. Bernays, p.
36, Übertritte aus dem einen in das
andere Lager vorkamen; Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hib.
Lec.</hi> p. 166; cf. Caspari, <hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 25;
Jul. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. 224. C.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὰ δὲ ἄλλα γε πάντα ἐστὶν ὑμῖν τε κἀκείνοις</foreign>
    (<hi rend="italic">i.e.</hi> <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Χριστιανοῖς</foreign>)
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">παραπλήσια. καταλελοίπατε τὴν πατρίδα ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνοι</foreign>.</note> Moreover, Lucian, with all his
delicate genius, had little power of understanding the force
of religious enthusiasm. It is pretty clear that Peregrinus
was not an ordinary Cynic; he had felt the spell of Oriental
and Pythagorean mysticism. His Cynicism was probably
tinctured with a religion of the same type as that of Apollonius
of Tyana.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 36,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐς τὴν μεσημβρίαν ἀποβλέπων</foreign>: c. 25,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅπως τὴν καρτηρίαν ἐπιδείξηται ὥσπερ οἱ Βραχμᾶνες,
    ἐκείνοις γὰρ αὐτὸν ἠχίου Θεαγένης εἰκάζειν</foreign>.</note> And it is his failure to appreciate the fervour of
this mystical elation in Peregrinus and his disciples which
misled Lucian, and makes his narrative misleading.
</p>

<p>
Lucian suggests that, when he visited Olympia for the
fourth time, he found that the influence of Peregrinus was
on the wane.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 2.</note> Yet even from Lucian’s own narrative it is
clear that Peregrinus and his doings were attracting almost as
much attention as the games. On Lucian’s arrival, the first thing
he heard was a rumour that the great Cynic had resolved to
die upon a flaming pyre, like the hero who was the mythic
patron of the school. Peregrinus professed that by his
self-<pb n="356"/><anchor id="Pg356"/>immolation he was going to teach men, in the most impressive
way, to make light of death. And many a Cynic sermon was
evidently delivered on the subject, the greatest preacher being
Theagenes, for whom Lucian displays a particular aversion.
There were, of course, many sceptics like Lucian himself. And
it is in the mouth of one of these enemies of the sect, in reply
to Theagenes, that Lucian has put the defamatory version of
the life of Peregrinus,<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 7 sqq.</note> to which we have referred.
</p>

<p>
Lucian assumes from the first that the self-martyrdom of
Peregrinus was prompted by mere vulgar love of notoriety.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 4,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἰς κενοδοξίαν τινὲς τοῦτο ἀναφέρουσι</foreign>.</note>
Yet it is quite possible that this is an unfair judgment. The
Stoic school, with which the Cynics had such a close affinity,
allowed that, in certain circumstances, suicide might be not
only a permissible, but a meritorious, nay, even a glorious act
of self-liberation.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 58, § 36; 70, § 8; <hi rend="italic">De
Prov.</hi> ii. 10; vi. § 7; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, iii. 15;
<hi rend="italic">De V. Beat.</hi> 19; Epict. i. 24. Cf. Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 12; i. 22; iii. 7; iii. 9; vi.
24; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">L’Opp.</hi> p. 212 sqq.</note> Seneca had often looked gladly to it as
the ever open door of escape from ignominy or torture. The
brilliant Stoic Euphrates, the darling of Roman society, weary
of age and disease, sought and obtained the permission of
Hadrian to drink the hemlock.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxix. 8,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ ὁ Εὐφράτης ὁ φιλόσοφος ἀπέθανεν ἐθελοντής, ἐπιτρέψαντος αὐτῷ
    καὶ τοῦ Ἁδριανοῦ κωνεῖον διὰ τὸ γῆρας καὶ διὰ τὴν νόσον πιεῖν</foreign>.</note> And that emperor himself,
in his last sickness, begged the drug from his physician who
killed himself to escape compliance.<note place="foot">Ael. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 24.</note> Diogenes had handed
the dagger to his favourite pupil, Antisthenes, when tortured
by disease.<note place="foot">Diog. Laert. vi. 18; cf. vi. 77, for
the death of Diogenes himself.</note> The burden of the Cynic preaching was the
nothingness of the things of sense and contempt for death.
Is it not possible that what Lucian heard from the lips of
Peregrinus himself was true, and that he wished, it may be
with mingled motives, by his own act to show men how to
treat with indifference the last terror of humanity?
</p>

<p>
That the end of Peregrinus was surrounded by superstition
and magnified by grandiose effects is more than probable.
Such things belonged to the spirit of the age. And the calm,
critical good sense of Lucian, which had no sympathy with
these weaknesses, saw nothing in the scene but calculating
imposture. Already oracles were circulating in which
Pere<pb n="357"/><anchor id="Pg357"/>grinus appears as the phœnix, rising unscathed and rejuvenescent
from the pyre, predicting that he is to be a guardian spirit
of the night, that altars will rise in his honour, and that he
will perform miracles of healing. Theagenes blazed abroad a
Sibylline verse which bade men, <q>when the greatest of the
Cynics has come to lofty Olympus, to honour the night-roaming
hero who is enthroned beside Hephaestus and the
princely Hector.</q><note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 29.</note> Lucian found himself wedged in a dense
crowd who came to hear the last apology of the Cynic
apostle. Some were applauding, and some denouncing him
as an impostor. Lucian could hear little in the melée. But
now and then, above the roar, he could hear the pale,
tremulous old man tell the surging crowd that, having lived
like Heracles, he must die like Heracles, and mingle with the
ether, <q>bringing a golden life to a golden close.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 33.</note> Lucian
thought his paleness was due to terror at the nearness of his
self-imposed death. It was more probably the result of
ascetic fervour and overstrained excitement. The spectacle
sent Lucian away in a fit of rather cruel laughter.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 34,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐγὼ δέ, εἰκάζεις, οἶμαι, πῶς ἐγέλων</foreign>. <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Baur’s view of this
piece (<hi rend="italic">Ch. Hist.</hi> ii. 170). He thinks
the self-immolation of Peregrinus pure
fiction, and that Lucian’s object throughout
was to discredit Christianity.</note>
</p>

<p>
The closing scene, which took place two or three miles
from Olympia, was ordered with solemn religious effect. It
evidently impressed even the sceptic’s imagination. A high
pyre had been prepared, with torches and faggots ready. As
the moon rose, the voluntary victim appeared in the garb of
his sect, surrounded by his leading disciples. He then disrobed
himself, flung incense on the flame, and, turning to the
south, cried aloud—<q>Daemons of my father and my mother
graciously receive me.</q> After these words, he leapt into the
blaze which at once enveloped him, and he was seen no more.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 36.</note>
The Cynic brothers stood long gazing into the pyre in silent
grief, until Lucian aroused their anger by some jeers, not, perhaps,
in the best taste. On his way back to Olympia, he pondered
on the follies of men, and the craving for empty fame.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 38.</note> To
Lucian there was nothing more in the tragic scene than that.
And he amused himself by the way with the creation of a
myth, and watching how it would grow. To some who met
<pb n="358"/><anchor id="Pg358"/>him on the road, too late for the spectacle, he told how, as
the pyre burst into flame, there was a great earthquake accompanied
by subterranean thunder, and a vulture rose from the
fire, proclaiming in a high human voice, as it winged its way
heavenwards, <q>I have left earth behind, and I go to Olympus.</q><note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 39.</note>
The poor fools, on whose credulity Lucian was rather heartlessly
playing, with a shudder of awe fell to questioning him
whether the bird flew to the east or the west. And, on his
return to Olympia, he was rewarded in the way he liked best,
by finding the tale which he had cradled already full grown.
A venerable man, whom he encountered, related that with his
own eyes he had seen the vulture rising from the pyre, and
added that he had just met Peregrinus himself walking in the
<q>seven-voiced cloister,</q> clothed in white raiment, and with a
chaplet of olive on his head.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lucian’s picture of the death of Peregrinus, whatever we
may think of its fairness and discernment, is immensely
valuable for many things besides the light which it casts on
Lucian’s attitude to all forms of extravagance and superstition.
In spite of his contempt for them, he himself reveals that the
Cynics were a great popular force. We see also that Cynicism
was, in spite of its generally deistic spirit, sometimes leagued
with real or affected religious sentiment. As to the real
character of Peregrinus, there is reason to believe that Lucian
did not read it aright. The impression which the Cynic made
on Aulus Gellius was very different. When Gellius was at
Athens in his student days, he used often to visit Peregrinus,
who was then living in a little hut in the suburbs, and he found
the Cynic’s discourses profitable and high-toned. In particular,
Peregrinus used to tell his hearers that the chance of apparent
evasion or concealment would never tempt the wise man to sin.
Concealment was really impossible, for, in the words of
Sophocles, <q>Time, the all-seeing, the all-hearing, lays bare all
secrets.</q> Evidently Peregrinus had other admirers besides the
Cynic brethren who hailed his apotheosis at Olympia.<note place="foot">A. Gell. xii. 11, virum gravem
atque constantem vidimus ... deversantem
in quodam tugurio extra
urbem.</note> Who
can draw the line, in such an age, between the fanatic and
the impostor?
</p>

<p>
The bitterness with which Lucian assails the Cynics
<pb n="359"/><anchor id="Pg359"/>of his day, while it was justified by the scandalous morals
of a certain number, is also a testimony to the world-wide
influence of the sect. The ranks of these rude field-preachers
would not have attracted so many impostors if the
profession had not commanded great power and influence over
the masses. The older Cynicism, which sprang from the
simpler and more popular aspect of the Socratic teaching, had
long disappeared. Its place was taken by the Stoic system,
which gave a broad and highly elaborated scientific basis to the
doctrine of the freedom and independence of the virtuous will.
The rules of conduct were deduced from a well-articulated theory
of the universe and human nature, and they were expounded
with all the dexterity of a finished dialectic. The later
Stoicism, as we have seen, like the other schools, tended to
neglect theory, in the effort to form the virtuous character—a
tendency which is seen at its height in Musonius and
Epictetus. But, as Stoicism became less scientific, it inclined
to return more and more to the spirit and method of the
older Cynicism. The true, earnest Cynic seems to be almost
the philosophic ideal of Epictetus. Thus it was that, in the
first century after Christ, Cynicism emerged from its long
obscurity to take up the part of a rather one-sided popular
Stoicism. It was really pointed or sensational preaching of a
few great moral truths, common to all the schools, which the
condition of society urgently called for.<note place="foot">Zeller,
    <hi rend="italic"><anchor id="corr359"/><corr sic="Phil der.">Phil. der</corr> Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
685; Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Luc. u. die Kyniker</hi>, p.
27 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ideal of the Cynic life has been painted with gentle
enthusiasm by Epictetus.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 22, § 23,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ εἰδέναι δεῖ ὅτι ἄγγελος ἀπὸ Διὸς ἀπέσταλται πρὸς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους,
    περὶ ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν ὑποδείξων αὐτοῖς ὅτι πεπλάνηται καὶ ἀλλαχοῦ
    ζητοῦσι τὴν οὐσίαν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ὅπου οὐκ ἔστιν, ὅπου δ’ ἔστιν οὐκ ἐνθυμοῦνται κτλ.</foreign></note> The true Cynic is a messenger from
Zeus, to tell men that they have wandered far from the right
way, that they are seeking happiness in regions where
happiness is not to be found. It is not to be found in the
glory of consulships, or in the Golden House of Nero.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 22, §§ 28-30.</note> It
lies close to us, yet in the last place where we ever seek it,
in ourselves, in the clear vision of the ruling faculty, in
freedom from the bondage to imagined good, to the things of
sense.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 38,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅπου οὐ δοκεῖτε οὐδὲ θέλετε ζητῆσαι αὐτό. εἰ γὰρ ἠθέλετε,
    εὕρετε ἂν ἐν ὑμῖν ὄν κτλ.</foreign></note> This preaching was also to be preaching by example.
<pb n="360"/><anchor id="Pg360"/>The gospel of renunciation has been discredited from age to age
when it has come from the lips of a man lapped in downy
comfort, who never gave up anything in his life, and who indolently
points his flock to the steep road which he never means
to tread with his own feet. But the Cynic of Epictetus, with
a true vocation, could point to himself, without home or wife
or children, without a city, without possessions, having forsaken
all for moral freedom.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 22, § 47,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἴδετέ με, ὅτι ἄπολίς εἰμι, ἄοικος, ἀκτήμων, ἄδουλος</foreign>.</note> He has done it at the call of God,
not from mere caprice, or a fancy to wander lawlessly on the
outskirts of society.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 56,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Κυνικῷ δὲ Καῖσαρ τίς ἐστιν ἢ ὁ καταπεπομφὼς αὐτὸν καὶ
    ᾧ λατρεύει, ὁ Ζεύς</foreign>.</note> He has done it because the condition of
the world demands such stern self-restraint in the chief who
would save the discipline of an army engaged in desperate
battle. It is a combat like the Olympian strife which he has
to face, and woe to him who enters the lists untrained and
unprepared.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 52.</note> The care of wife and children is not for one who
has laid upon him the care of the family of man, who has to
console and admonish, and guide them into the right way.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 67.</note>
All worldly loves and entanglements must be put aside by one
who claims to be the <q>spy and herald of God.</q> The Cynic is
the father of all men; the men are his sons, the women his
daughters.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 81,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντας ἀνθρώπους πεπαιδοποίηται, τοὺς ἄνδρας υἱοὺς ἔχει,
    τὰς γυναῖκας θυγατέρας</foreign>.</note> When he rebukes them, it is as a father in God,
a minister of Zeus. Nor may he take a part in the government
of any earthly state, which is a petty affair in comparison
with the ministry with which he is charged. How should he
meddle with the administration of Athens or Corinth, who has
to deal with the moral fortunes of the whole commonwealth of
man.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 84.</note> Possessing in himself the secret of happiness and woe,
he never descends into the vulgar contest, where he may be
overcome by the vilest and poorest spirits, for objects which
he has trained himself to regard as absolutely indifferent or
worthless. And so, he is proof against the spitefulness of
fortune and the baseness or violence of man. He will calmly
suffer blows or insults as sent by Zeus, just as Heracles bore
cheerfully and triumphantly the toils which were laid on him
by Eurystheus. The true Cynic will even love those who
buffet and insult him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 100.</note> He will also resemble his patron hero
<pb n="361"/><anchor id="Pg361"/>in the fresh comely strength of his body, which is the gift of
temperance and long days passed under the open sky.<note place="foot">Epict. iii. 22, §§ 86, 87.</note> Above
all, he will have a conscience clearer than the sun, so that, at
peace with himself and having assurance of the friendship of the
gods, he may be able to speak with all boldness to his brothers
and his children.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 93,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πρὸ πάντων δὲ τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν αὐτοῦ δεῖ καθαρώτερον
    εἶναι τοῦ ἡλίου</foreign>.</note> This was the kind of moral ministry which
was needed by the age, and, in spite of both undeserved calumny,
and the real shame of many corrupt impostors in its ranks, the
missionary movement of Cynicism was one of undoubted power
and range. The resemblance, in many points, of the Cynics to
the early Christian monks and ascetics has been often noticed,
and men sometimes passed from the one camp to the other
without any violent wrench.<note place="foot">Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Luc. u. die Kyniker</hi>, pp.
36-38.</note> The rhetor Aristides, in a
fierce attack on the Cynic sect, makes it a reproach that they
have much in common with <q>the impious in Palestine.</q> Tatian,
and others of the Gnostic ascetics, were in close connection
with leading Cynics.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 99.</note> How easily they were absorbed into
the bosom of the Church we can see from the tale of
Maximus, an Egyptian Cynic of the fourth century, who
continued to wear the distinctive marks of the philosophic
brotherhood, till he was installed as bishop of Constantinople.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 37; Caspari, <hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 25.</note>
And the contemporary eulogies of Cynic virtue by John
Chrysostom and Themistius testify at once to the importance of
a movement the strength of which was not spent till after the
fall of the Western Empire, and to its affinities for the kindred
movement of Christian asceticism.
</p>

<p>
These <q>ambassadors of God,</q> as they claimed to be, cared
little, like S. Paul, for <q>the wisdom of the world,</q> or for the
figments of the poets, and those great cosmic theories which
enabled Seneca to sustain or rekindle his moral faith. With
rare exceptions, such as Oenomaus of Gadara, they seldom
committed their ideas to writing.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 5.</note> For the serried dialectic
of the Stoics they substituted the sharp biting epigram and
lively repartee, in which even the gentle Demonax indulged.<note place="foot">Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 16-21.</note>
Demetrius, who saw the reigns of both Caligula and Domitian,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ben.</hi> vii. 11; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
T.</hi> vii. 42.</note>
was a man of real power and distinction. He was revered by
<pb n="362"/><anchor id="Pg362"/>Seneca as a moral teacher of remarkable influence, <q>a great man
even if compared with the greatest,</q><note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ben.</hi> vii. i. 3, vir meo judicio
magnus etiamsi maximis comparetur;
vii. 8, 2.</note> who lived up to the
severest counsels which he addressed to others. He would bear
cold and nakedness and hard lodging with cheerful fortitude,
he was a man whom not even the age of Nero could corrupt.
His poverty was genuine, and he would never beg.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 20, 9; <hi rend="italic">Vit. B.</hi> xviii. 3.</note> He
set little store by philosophical theory, in comparison with
diligent application of a few tried and well-conned precepts.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> vii. 1, § 3, egregia hoc
dicere solet, Plus prodesse, si pauca
praecepta sapientiae teneas, sed illa in
promptu tibi sint, etc.</note>
Yet he had the brand of culture, and once, when his taste was
offended by a bad, tactless reader, who was ruining a passage
in the <hi rend="italic">Bacchae</hi>, he snatched the book from his hands and tore
it in pieces.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Adv. Indoct.</hi> 19.</note> Although he disdained the trimmed, artificial
eloquence of the schools, he had the fire and impetus of the
true orator.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> vii. 8, 2.</note> With little taste for abstract musings, he consoled
the last hours of Thrasea in prison with a discourse on
the nature of the soul and the mystery of its severance from
the body at death.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 34.</note> He formed a close alliance for a time with
that roaming hierophant of philosophy, Apollonius of Tyana,
the bond between them being probably a common asceticism
and a common hatred of the imperial tyranny.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 25, 42;
vi. 13; viii. 10; vii. 42.</note> For Demetrius,
if not a revolutionary, was a leader of the philosophic opposition,
which assailed the emperors, not so much in their political
capacity, as because they too often represented and stimulated
the moral lawlessness and materialism of the age. Our
sympathies must be with Demetrius when he boldly faced the
dangerous scowl of Nero with the <hi rend="italic">mot</hi>, <q>You threaten me with
death, but nature threatens you.</q><note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> i. 25, § 22,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀπειλεῖς μοι θάνατον σοὶ δ’ ἡ φύσις</foreign>.</note> But our sympathies will
be rather with Vespasian, the plain old soldier, who, when
Demetrius openly insulted him, treated the <q>Cynic bark</q> with
quiet contempt.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> xiii. philosophorum
contumaciam lenissime tulit; <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x.;
D. Cass. lxvi. 13.</note> In truth, the Flavian emperors, till the expulsion
of the philosophers by Domitian, seem to have been on
the whole indulgent to the outspoken freedom of the Cynics.<note place="foot">Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Luc. u. die Kyniker</hi>, p. 29.</note>
Occasionally, however, the daring censor had, in the interests of
<pb n="363"/><anchor id="Pg363"/>authority, to be restrained. Once, when Titus was in the
theatre, with the Jewess Berenice by his side, a Cynic, bearing
the name of the founder of the sect, gave voice in a long
bitter oration to popular feeling against what was regarded as
a shameful union. This Cynic John the Baptist, got off with
a scourging.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxvi. 15.</note> A comrade named Heros, however, repeated the
offensive expostulation, and lost his head. Peregrinus, for a
similar attack on Antoninus Pius, was quietly warned by the
prefect to leave the precincts of Rome. In the third century
there was a great change in the political fortunes and attitude
of the sect; Cynics are even found basking in imperial
favour, and lending their support to the imperial power.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 19; the
attempt of Peregrinus in Greece is probably
referred to in Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant.
P.</hi> 5, § 5; cf. Bernays, p. 30; Caspari,
<hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Cynics, from the days of Antisthenes, had poured
contempt on the popular religion and the worship of material
images of the Divine. They were probably the purest
monotheists that classical antiquity produced.<note place="foot">Bernays, p. 31.</note> Demetrius
is almost Epicurean in his belief in eternal Fate, and his contempt
for the wavering wills and caprices which mythological
fancy ascribed to the Olympian gods.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> 5, §§ 5-7.</note> Demonax, the
mildest and most humane member of the school in imperial
times, refused to offer sacrifices or even to seek initiation
in the Mysteries of Eleusis.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 11; Oenom. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> 13,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐκ ἀθάνατοι, ἀλλὰ λίθινοι καὶ ξύλινοι δεσπόται ἀνθρώπων</foreign>, 14; cf. Julian, <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
vii. 204, <hi rend="italic">a</hi>.</note> When he was impeached for
impiety before the Athenian courts, he replied that, as for
sacrifices, the Deity had no need of them, and that touching
the Mysteries, he was in this dilemma: if they contained
a revelation of what was good for men, he must in duty
publish it; if they were bad and worthless, he would feel
equally bound to warn the people against the deception.
But the most fearless and trenchant assailant of the popular
theology among the Cynics was Oenomaus of Gadara, in the
reign of Hadrian.<note place="foot">Caspari, <hi rend="italic">De Cyn.</hi> p. 12; Bernays, p.
35; Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p. 690.</note> Oenomaus rejected, with the frankest scorn,
the anthropomorphic fables of heathenism. In particular, he
directed his fiercest attacks against the revival of that faith
in oracles and divination which was a marked characteristic
of the Antonine age. Plutarch, in a charming walk
<pb n="364"/><anchor id="Pg364"/>round the sights of Delphi, in which he acts as cicerone,
describes a Cynic named Didymus as assailing the influence
of oracles on human character.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> vii.</note> But Oenomaus, as we know
him from Eusebius, was a far more formidable and more
pitiless iconoclast than Didymus. He constructed an elaborate
historical demonstration to show that the oracles were inspired
neither by the gods nor by daemons, but were a very human
contrivance to dupe the credulous. And in connection with
the subject of oracles, he dealt with the question of free-will,
and asserted man’s inalienable liberty, and the responsibility
for all his actions which is the necessary concomitant of
freedom. Oenomaus treated Dodona and Delphi with such
jaunty disrespect that, at the distance of a century and a
half, his memory aroused the anger of Julian to such a degree,
that the imperial champion of paganism could hardly find
words strong enough to express his feelings.<note place="foot">Julian, <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. 209.</note> Oenomaus is
a wretch who is cutting at the roots, not only of all reverence
for divine things, but of all those moral instincts implanted
in our souls by God, which are the foundation of all right
conduct and justice. For such fellows no punishment could
be too severe; they are worse than brigands and wreckers.<note place="foot">Jul. vii. 209, 210,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διαφέρουσι γὰρ οὗτοί τι τῶν ἐπ’ ἐρημίας λῃστευόντων καὶ κατειληφότων
    τὰς ἀκτὰς ἐπὶ τῷ λυμαίνεσθαι τοῖς καταπλέουσι</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The resolute rejection of the forms of popular worship, and
of the claims of divination, is hardly less marked in the mild
and tolerant Demonax.<note place="foot">Bernays, <hi rend="italic">Luc. u. die Kyniker</hi>, p. 104,
agrees with Bekker that the <hi rend="italic">Demonax</hi>
can hardly be a genuine work of Lucian.
But its author was a contemporary and
friend of Demonax (c. i.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐπὶ μήκιστον συνεγενόμην</foreign>).</note> Demonax, whose life extended probably
from 50 to 150 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>,<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
691, n. 6.</note> sprang from a family in Cyprus of
some wealth and distinction, and had a finished literary culture.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 3 sqq.</note>
But he had conceived from childhood a passion for the philosophic
life, according to the ideal of that age. His teachers
were Cynics or Stoics, but in speculative opinion he was
broadly Eclectic. In his long life he had associated with Demetrius
and Epictetus, Apollonius and Herodes Atticus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 3, 24, 31.</note> When
asked once who was his favourite philosopher, he replied that
he reverenced Socrates, admired Diogenes, and loved Aristippus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 62.</note>
His tone had perhaps the greatest affinity for the simplicity of
<pb n="365"/><anchor id="Pg365"/>the Socratic teaching. But he did not adopt the irony of the
master, which, if it was a potent arm of dialectic, often left the
subject of it in an irritated and humiliated mood. Demonax
was a true Cynic in his contempt for ordinary objects of greed
and ambition,<note place="foot">Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 5, 6.</note> in the simple, austere fashion of his daily life,
and in the keen epigrammatic point, often, to our taste, verging
on rudeness, with which he would expose pretence and rebuke
any kind of extravagance.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 14.</note> But although he cultivated a
severe bodily discipline, so as to limit to the utmost his external
wants, he carefully avoided any ostentatious singularity of
manner to win a vulgar notoriety. He had an infinite charity
for all sorts of men, excepting only those who seemed beyond
the hope of amendment.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 7.</note> His counsels were given with an Attic
grace and brightness which sent people away from his company
cheered and improved, and hopeful for the future. Treating
error as a disease incident to human nature, he attacked the
sin, but was gentle to the sinner.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 6.</note> He made it his task to
compose the feuds of cities and to stimulate unselfish patriotism;
he reconciled the quarrels of kinsmen; he would, on occasion,
chasten the prosperous, and comfort the failing and unfortunate,
by reminding both alike of the brief span allotted to either joy
or sorrow, and the long repose of oblivion which would soon set
a term to all the agitations of sorrow or of joy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 9, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
But there was another side to his teaching. Demonax was
no supple, easy-going conformist to usages which his reason
rejected. Early in his career, as has been said, he had to face
a prosecution before the tribunals of Athens, because he was
never seen to sacrifice to the gods, and declined initiation at
Eleusis. In each case, he defended his nonconformity in the
boldest tone.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 11,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τραχύτερον ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ προαίρεσιν ἀπελογήσατο</foreign>.</note> To a prophet whom he saw plying his trade
for hire, he put the dilemma: <q>If you can alter the course of
destiny, why do you not demand higher fees? If everything
happens by the decree of God, where is the value of your art?</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 37.</note>
When asked if he believed the soul to be immortal, he answered,
<q>It is as immortal as everything else.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 32.</note> He derided, in almost
brutal style, the effeminacy of the sophist Favorinus, and the
extravagant grief of Herodes Atticus for his son.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 12, 24.</note> He
    ruth<pb n="366"/><anchor id="Pg366"/>lessly exposed the pretences of sham philosophy wherever he
met it. When a youthful Eclectic professed his readiness to
obey any philosophic call, from the Academy, the Porch, or
the Pythagorean discipline of silence, Demonax cried out,
<q>Pythagoras calls you.</q><note place="foot">Luc. (?) <hi rend="italic">Dem.</hi> c. 14,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὗτος, ἔφη, προσειπὼν τὸ ὄνομα, καλεῖ σε Πυθαγόρας</foreign>.</note> He rebuked the pedantic archaism
of his day by telling an affected stylist that he spoke in the
fashion of Agamemnon’s time.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 26,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">σὺ δὲ μοι ὡς ἐπ’ Ἀγαμέμνονος ἀποκρίνῃ</foreign>.</note> When Epictetus advised him to
marry and become the father of a line of philosophers, he asked
the celibate preacher to give him one of his daughters.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 55.</note> The
Athenians, from a vulgar jealousy of Corinth, proposed to
defile their ancient memories by establishing gladiatorial shows
under the shadow of the Acropolis. Demonax, in the true spirit
of Athens from the time of Theseus, advised them first to sweep
away the altar of Pity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 57.</note>
</p>

<p>
Demonax lived to nearly a hundred years. He is said
never to have had an enemy. He was the object of universal
deference whenever he appeared in public. In his old age he
might enter any Athenian house uninvited, and they welcomed
him as their good genius. The children brought him their
little presents of fruit and called him father, and as he passed
through the market, the baker-women contended for the
honour of giving him their loaves. He died a voluntary
death, and wished for no tomb save what nature would give
him. But the Athenians were aware that they had seen in
him a rare apparition of goodness; they honoured him with
a splendid and imposing burial and mourned long for him.
And the bench on which he used to sit when he was weary
they deemed a sacred stone, and decked it with garlands long
after his death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 63 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Demonax, by a strange personal charm, attained to an
extraordinary popularity and reverence. But the great mass
of philosophic preachers had to face a great deal of obloquy
and vulgar contempt. Apart from the coarseness, arrogance,
and inconsistency of many of them, which gave just offence,
their very profession was an irritating challenge to a pleasure-loving
and worldly age. Men who gloried in the splendour
of their civic life, and were completely absorbed in it, who
<pb n="367"/><anchor id="Pg367"/>were flattered and cajoled by their magistrates and popular
leaders, could hardly like to be told by the vagrant, homeless
teacher, in beggar’s garb, that they were ignorant and perverted
and lost in a maze of deception. They would hardly
be pleased to hear that their civilisation was an empty show,
without a solid core of character, that their hopes of happiness
from a round of games and festivals, from the splendour of art
in temples and statues, were the merest mirage. The message
<hi rend="italic">Beati pauperes spiritu—Beati qui lugent</hi>, will never be a
popular one. That was the message to his age of the itinerant
Cynic preacher, and his unkempt beard and ragged cloak and
the fashion of his life made him the mark of cheap and
abundant ridicule. Sometimes the contempt was deserved;
no great movement for the elevation of humanity has been
free from impostors. Yet the severe judgment of the Cynic
missionaries on their age is that of the polished orator, who
had as great a scorn as Lucian for the sensual or mercenary
Cynic, and yet took up the scrip and staff himself, to propagate
the same gospel as the Cynics.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxiv. § 2; lxxii. § 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
Dion Chrysostom was certainly not a Cynic in the academic
sense, but he belonged to the same great movement. He
sprang from a good family at Prusa in Bithynia.<note place="foot">Cf. Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 7. For
other authorities <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der
Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p. 729, n. 1. Martha,
<hi rend="italic">Moralistes sous l’Emp. rom.</hi> 294, gives
a good sketch of Dion’s career.</note> He was
trained in all the arts of rhetoric, and taught and practised
them in the early part of his life. A suspected friendship led
to his banishment in the reign of Domitian, and in his exile,
with the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> and the <hi rend="italic">De Falsa Legatione</hi> as his companions,
he wandered over many lands, supporting himself
often by menial service.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiii. § 1.</note> He at last found himself in his
wanderings in regions where wild tribes of the Getae for a
century and a half had been harrying the distant outposts of
Hellenic civilisation on the northern shores of the Euxine.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 7.</note>
The news of the death of Domitian reached a camp on the
Danube when Dion was there. The soldiery, faithful to their
emperor, were excited and indignant, but, under the spell of
Dion’s eloquence, they were brought to acquiesce in the
accession of the blameless Nerva. Dion at length returned
to Rome, and rose to high favour at court. Trajan often
<pb n="368"/><anchor id="Pg368"/>invited him to his table, and used to take him as companion
in his state carriage, although the honest soldier did not
pretend to appreciate Dion’s rhetoric.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. 2;
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἔλεγε θαμὰ ἐπιστρεφόμενος ἐς τὸν Δίωνα “τί μὲν λέγεις,
        οὐκ οἶδα, φιλῶ δέ σε ὡς ἐμαυτόν.”</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
During his exile, as he tells us, Dion had been converted
to more serious views of life. The triumphs of conventional
declamation before fashionable audiences lost their glamour.
Dion became conscious of a loftier mission to the dim masses
of that far-spreading empire through whose cities and
wildernesses he was wandering.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiii. § 6, 9, 10,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">στολήν τε ταπεινὴν ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τἆλλα κολάσας ἐμαυτὸν
ἠλώμην πανταχοῦ</foreign>.</note> As to the eyes of Seneca,
men seemed to Dion, amid all their fair, cheerful life, to
be holding out their hands for help. Wherever he went, he
found that, in his beggar’s dress, he was surrounded by crowds
of people eager to hear any word of comfort or counsel
in the doubts and troubles of their lives. They assumed that
the poor wanderer was a philosopher. They plied him with
questions on the great problem, How to live; and the elegant
sophist was thus compelled to find an answer for them and
for himself.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 12,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πολλοὶ γὰρ ἠρώτων προσιόντες, ὅ τι μοι φαίνοιτο ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακόν.
    ὥστε ἠναγκαζόμην φροντίζειν ὑπὲρ τούτων ἵνα ἔχοιμι
ἀποκρίνεσθαι τοὶς ἐρωτώσιν</foreign>.
With the conversion of Dion cf. of that
of Isaeus and Polemon, etc., Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> i. p. 218; <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i.
13; iv. 20; Epict. iii. 1; Diog. Laert.
iv. 3, § 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Dion never quite shook off the traditions and tone of the
rhetorical school. The ambition to say things in the most
elegant and attractive style, the love of amplifying, in leisurely
and elaborate development, a commonplace and hackneyed theme
still clings to him. His eighty orations are many of them
rather essays than popular harangues. They range over all sorts
of subjects, literary, mythological, and artistic, political and
social, as well as purely ethical or religious. But, after all, Dion is
unmistakably the preacher of a great moral revival and reform.
He cannot be classed definitely with any particular school of
philosophy. He is the apostle of Greek culture, yet he admires
Diogenes, the founder of the Cynics.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxvii. § 25; iv. § 1;
vi.</note> If he had any philosophic
ancestry, he would probably have traced himself to the
Xenophontic Socrates.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> liv.; xiii. § 13, 14,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐνίοτε ὑπὸ ἀπορίας ᾖα ἐπί τινα λόγον ἀρχαῖον λεγόμενον ὑπό τινος
Σωκράτους κτλ.</foreign>: cf.
xviii. § 14,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντων ἄριστος ἐμοὶ καὶ λυσιτελέστατος πρὸς ταῦτα πάντα Ξενοφῶν</foreign>.</note> But he is really the rhetorical apostle
<pb n="369"/><anchor id="Pg369"/>of the few great moral principles which were in the air, the
common stock of Platonist, Stoic, Cynic, even the Epicurean.
Philosophy to him is really a religion, the science of right
living in conformity to the will of the Heavenly Power. But
it is also the practice of right living. No Christian preacher
has probably ever insisted more strongly on the gulf which
separates the commonplace life of the senses from the life
devoted to a moral ideal.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> lxx. § 1, 7;
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καθόλου βίος ἄλλος μὲν τοῦ φιλοσοφοῦντος, ἄλλος δὲ τῶν πολλῶν ἀνθρώπων</foreign>; cf. xiii. § 33.</note> The only philosophy worth the
name is the earnest quest of the path to true nobility and
virtue, in obedience to the good genius, the unerring monitor
within the breast of each of us, in whose counsels lies the
secret of happiness properly so called.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiii. § 28; xxiii. § 7,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐκοῦν τὸν τυχόντα ἀγαθοῦ δαίμονος ἡγῇ δικαίως ζῆν καὶ
φρονίμως καὶ σωφρόνως</foreign>; cf. Epict.
i. § 14,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐπίτροπον ἑκάστῳ παρέστησε, τὸν ἑκάστου δαίμονα κτλ.</foreign> M. Aurel. v. 27.</note> Hence Dion speaks
with the utmost scorn alike of the coarse Cynic impostor, who
disgraces his calling by buffoonery and debauchery,<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxii. § 9; xxxv. § 2,
3; xxxiv. § 2.</note> and the
philosophic exquisite who tickles the ears of a fashionable
audience with delicacies of phrase, but never thinks of trying
to make them better men. He feels a sincere indignation at this
dilettante trifling, in view of a world which is in urgent need
of practical guidance.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xvi. § 2, 3; xxxv. § 8; cf. xiii.
§ 11,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἱ μὲν γὰρ πολλοὶ τῶν καλουμένων φιλοσόφων αὐτοὺς
ἀνακηρύττουσιν κτλ.</foreign></note> For Dion, after all his wanderings
through the Roman world, has no illusions as to its moral
condition. He is almost as great a pessimist as Seneca or
Juvenal. In spite of all its splendour and outward prosperity,
society in the reign of Trajan seemed to Dion to be in a perilous
state. Along with his own conversion came the revelation of
the hopeless bewilderment of men in the search for happiness.
Dimly conscious of their evil plight, they are yet utterly
ignorant of the way to escape from it. They are swept hither
and thither in a vortex of confused passions and longings for
material pleasures.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiii. § 13, 34,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐδόκουν δέ μοι πάντες ἄφρονες, φερόμενοι τάντες ἐν ταὐτῷ καὶ
περὶ τὰ αὐτά, περί τε χρήματα καὶ δόξας καὶ σωμάτων τινὰς ἡδονάς κτλ.</foreign></note> Material civilisation, without any accompanying
moral discipline, has produced the familiar and inevitable
result, in an ever-increasing appetite for wealth and
enjoyment and showy distinction, which ends in perpetual disillusionment.
Dion warns the people of Tarsus that they are all
<pb n="370"/><anchor id="Pg370"/>sunk in a deep sensual slumber, and living in a world of mere
dreams, in which the reality of things is absolutely inverted.
Their famous river, their stately buildings, their wealth, even
their religious festivals, on which they plume themselves, are
the merest show of happiness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxiii. § 17, 23, 32; cf. the
ghastly exposure in <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. § 133.</note> Its real secret, which lies in
temperance, justice, and true piety, is quite hidden from their
eyes. When that secret is learnt, their buildings may be less
stately, gold and silver will perhaps not be so abundant, there
will be less soft and delicate living, there may be even fewer
costly sacrifices as piety increases; but there will be a clearer
perception of the true values of things, and a chastened
temperance of spirit, which are the only security for the
permanence of society. And the moralist points his audience
to the splendid civilisations of the past that have perished
because they were without a soul. Assyria and Lydia, the
great cities of Magna Graecia which lived in a dream of luxury,
what are they now? And, latest example of all, Macedon,
who pushed her conquests to the gates of India, and came
into possession of the hoarded treasures of the great Eastern
Empires, is gone, and royal Pella, the home of the race, is now
a heap of bricks.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxiii. §§ 24-28,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἴ τις διέρχοιτο Πέλλαν οὐδὲ σημεῖον ὄψεται πόλεως,
οὐδὲν δίχα τοῦ πολὺν κέραμον εἶναι συντετριμμένον ἐν τῷ τόπῳ</foreign>. Cf. xiii. §§ 33, 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
It needed a courage springing from enthusiasm and conviction
to preach such unpalatable truths to an age which
gloried in its material splendour. Dion is often conscious
of the difficulty of his task; and he exerts all his trained
dexterity to appease opposition, and gain a hearing for his
message.<note place="foot">A good example is the opening of
<hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxii.</note> As regards the reform of character, Dion has no
new message to deliver. His is the old gospel of renunciation
for the sake of freedom, the doctrine of a right estimate of competing
objects of desire and of the true ends of life. Dion, like
nearly all Greek moralists from Socrates downwards, treats moral
error and reform as rather a matter of the intellect than of
emotional impulse. Vice is the condition of a besotted mind,
which has lost the power of seeing things as they really are;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiv. § 2; xiii. § 13,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐδόκουν δέ μοι πάντες ἄφρονες, κτλ.</foreign>: cf. Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil.
der Gr.</hi> iii. 1, p. 730, er zeigt mit den
Stoikern, dass die wahre Freiheit mit
der Vernünftigkeit, die Sklaverei mit
der Unvernunft zusammenfalle; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
xvi. § 4.</note>
<pb n="371"/><anchor id="Pg371"/>conversion must be effected, not by appeals to the feelings, but
by clarifying the mental vision. There is but little reference
to religion as a means of reform, although Dion speaks of the
love of God as a support of the virtuous character. As an
experienced moral director, Dion knew well the necessity of
constant iteration of the old truths. Just as the sick man
will violate his doctor’s orders, well knowing that he does so
to his hurt, so the moral patient may long refuse to follow a
principle of life which his reason has accepted.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xvii. 2, 3.</note> And so the
preacher, instead of apologising for repeating himself, will regard
it as a duty and a necessity to do so.
</p>

<p>
But Dion did not aim at the formation of any cloistered
virtue, concentrated on personal salvation. He has a fine
passage in which he shows that retreat, (<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀναχώρησις</foreign>) detachment
of spirit, is quite possible without withdrawing from the
noises of the world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xx. § 8,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μὴ οὖν βελτίστη καὶ λυσιτελεστάτη πασῶν ἡ εἰς αὐτὸν
ἀναχώρησις κτλ.</foreign> Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hib. Lec.</hi> p. 150.</note> And he felt himself charged with a
mission to bring the higher principles of conduct into the civic
life of the time. We know from Pliny’s correspondence with
Trajan, that the great cities of Bithynia, and not least Dion’s
birthplace,<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 17, 23, 24, 58; Bury,
<hi rend="italic">Rom. Emp.</hi> p. 439.</note> were then suffering from unskilful administration
and wasteful finance. Dion completes the picture by showing
us their miserable bickerings and jealousies about the most
trivial things. He denounces the unscrupulous flattery of the
masses by men whose only object was the transient distinction
of municipal office, the passion for place and power, without any
sober wish to serve or elevate the community. He also exposes
the caprice, the lazy selfishness, and the petulant ingratitude of
the crowd.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxiv. § 10, 14, 48;
xxxviii. § 11; xxxiv. § 16, 19, 29, 31.</note> Dion, it is true, is an idealist, and his ideals of society
are perhaps not much nearer realisation in some of our great cities
than they were then. He often delivered his message to the
most unpromising audiences. Some of his finest conceptions
of social reorganisation were expounded before rude gatherings
on the very verge of civilisation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxxvi.</note> Once, in his wanderings, he
found himself under the walls of a half-ruined Greek town,
which had been attacked, the day before, by a horde of Scythian
barbarians. There, on the steps of the temple of Zeus, he
<pb n="372"/><anchor id="Pg372"/>expounded to an eager throng of mean Greek traders, with
all the worst vices, and only some faded traces of the culture
of their race, the true meaning of city life.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxvi. § 15, 8, 9,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντες οἱ Βορυσθενῖται περὶ τὸν ποιητὴν ἐσπουδάκασιν κτλ.</foreign> Cf. § 20, 23.</note> It is a society of
men under the kingship of law, from which all greed, intemperance,
and violence have been banished; a little world which,
in its peaceful order and linked harmonies, should be modelled
on the more majestic order of the great city of the universe,
the city of gods and men.
</p>

<p>
How far from their ideal were the cities of his native land,
Dion saw only too well. The urban life of Asia, as the result
of the Greek conquests, has perhaps never been surpassed in
external splendour and prosperity, and even in a diffusion of
intellectual culture. The palmy days of the glorious spring-time
of Hellenic vigour and genius in Miletus, Phocaea, and
Rhodes, seemed to be reproduced even in inland places, which
for 1500 years have returned to waste.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> i. pp. 326, 354;
cf. Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xiv. xv. 223-230 (Dind.).</note> Agriculture and
trade combined to produce an extraordinary and prosperous
activity. Education was endowed and organised, and literary
culture became almost universal.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> i. p. 362; cf.
Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 7; <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi>
i. p. 220,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ προβήσεσθαι ἐπὶ μέγα τὰς Κλαζομενὰς ἡγουμένων εἰ τοιοῦτος δὴ ἀνὲρ
ἐμπαιδεύσοι σφισίν κτλ.</foreign></note> Nowhere did the wandering
sophist find more eager audiences, and no part of the Roman
world in that age contributed so great a number of teachers,
physicians, and philosophers. The single province of Bithynia,
within half a century, could boast of such names as Arrian, Dion
Cassius, and Dion Chrysostom himself. But moral and political
improvement did not keep pace with an immense material
and intellectual progress. The life of the cities indeed was very
intense; but, in the absence of the wider interests of the great
days of freedom, they wasted their energies in futile contests
for visionary distinctions and advantages. A continual struggle
was going on for the <q>primacy</q> of the province, and the name
of metropolis. Ephesus, the real capital, was challenged by
Smyrna, which on its coins describes itself as <q>first in greatness
and beauty.</q><note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> i. pp. 329, 330;
cf. Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xv.; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
Tyan.</hi> iv. 7,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">φρονεῖν ἐκέλευεν ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῖς μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ τῆς πόλεως εἴδει.</foreign> D.
Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxiv. 48; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sitteng.</hi>
iii. p. 111.</note> The feuds between Nicomedia and its near
neighbour Nicaea caused Dion particular anxiety, and his speech
<pb n="373"/><anchor id="Pg373"/>to the people of Nicomedia is the best picture of the evils
which we are describing.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxviii. § 7, 31, 36.</note>
</p>

<p>
The two cities have much in common. Their families have
intermarried; they are constantly meeting in their markets
and great religious festivals. They are bound together by
innumerable ties of private friendship.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xl. § 27,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἡ δὲ τῶν ἐγγὺς οὕτως καὶ ὀμόρων διαφορὰ καὶ τὸ μῖσος οὐδὲν
ἄλλο ἔοικεν ἢ στάσει μιᾶς πόλεως ὅπου καὶ γάμων κοινωνία, κτλ.</foreign></note> The primacy for which
they contend is the merest figment; there are no material
advantages at stake. Rather, these dissensions give a corrupt
Roman governor, who trades upon them, the power to injure
both the rival claimants.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxxviii. §§ 26-31.</note> The same is true of other cities.
Tarsus is engaged in bitter contention with Mallus for a mere
line of sandhills on their frontiers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxxiv. §§ 44-48,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">αἱ μὲν οὖν θῖνες καὶ τὸ πρὸς τῇ λίμνῃ χωρίον οὐδενὸς ἄξια</foreign>.</note> Dion’s native Prusa has
an exasperated quarrel with Apamea for no solid reason whatever,
although the two towns are closely linked by nature to
one another, and mutually dependent through their trade and
manufactures. All this miserable and foolish jealousy Dion
exposes with excellent skill and sense; and he employs an
abundant wealth of illustration in painting the happiness which
attends harmony and good-will. It is the law of the universe,
from the tiny gregarious insect whose life is but for a day, to
the eternal procession of the starry spheres. The ant, in the
common industry of the Lilliputian commonwealth, yields to
his brother toiler, or helps him on his way.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xl. § 35.</note> The primal
elements of the Cosmos are tempered to a due observance of
their several bounds and laws. The sun himself hides his
splendour each night to give place to the lesser radiance of
the stars. This is rhetoric, of course, but it is rhetoric with a
moral burden. And it is impossible not to admire the lofty
tone of this heathen sophist, preaching the duty of forgiveness,
of mutual love and deference, the blessing of the quiet spirit
<q>which seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh
no evil.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxxviii. §§ 42-46.</note> There is a certain pathos in remembering that,
within the very walls where these elevated orations were
delivered, there were shy companies of men and women meeting
in the early dawn to sing hymns to One who, three
generations before in Galilee, had taught a similar gospel of love
<pb n="374"/><anchor id="Pg374"/>and self-suppression, but with a strange mystic charm, denied
to the pagan eloquence, and that Dion seems never to have
known those with whom he had so close a kindred.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 96, § 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
In many another oration Dion strove to raise the moral
tone of his age. His speech to the Alexandrians is probably
his most gallant protest against the besetting sins of a great
population. Alexandria was a congeries of many races, in
which probably the Hellenic type of the Ptolemies had succumbed
to the enduring Egyptian <hi rend="italic">morale</hi>.<note place="foot">Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">Greek World under
Roman Sway</hi>, p. 242; Merivale, viii.
p. 239; Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> ii. p. 264.</note> It was a populace at once
sensual and superstitious, passionately devoted to all excitement,
whether of games or orgiastic religious festival, with a
jeering irreverent vein, which did not spare even the greatest
Emperors. It was a curious medley—the seat of the most
renowned university of the ancient world, the gathering-place
and seed-ground of ideas which united the immemorial
mysticism of the East with the clear, cold reason of Hellas—and
yet a seething hot-bed of obscenity, which infected the
Roman world, a mob who gave way to lunatic excitement over
the triumph of an actor, or a singer, or the victor in a chariot-race.<note place="foot">Momms. ii. p. 263; D. Chrys. xxxii.;
Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 81; Ael. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c.
12, 14; D. Cass. lxix. 11; Petron. 31, 68.</note>
It required no ordinary courage to address such a crowd,
and to charge them with their glaring faults. The people of
Alexandria are literally intoxicated with a song. The music
which, according to old Greek theory, should regulate the passions,
here only maddens them.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxii. § 57, 41, 51,
55; Pl. <hi rend="italic">Rep.</hi> iii. 399; Arist. <hi rend="italic">Pol.</hi> viii. 5.</note> And in the races all human
dignity seems to be utterly lost in the futile excitement of the
spectators over some low fellow contending for a prize in solid
cash.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xxxii. § 75.</note> Such a mob earns only the contempt of its rulers, and
men say that the Alexandrians care for nothing but the <q>big
loaf</q> and the sight of a race.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 31,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἷς μόνον δεῖ παραβάλλειν τὸν πολὺν ἄρτον</foreign>.</note> All the dignity which should
surround a great people is forgotten in the theatre. It is
useless to boast of the majestic and bounteous river, the
harbours and markets crowded with the merchandise of
Western or Indian seas, of the visitors from every land, from
Italy, Greece, and Syria, from the Borysthenes, the Oxus, and
the Ganges.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 40.</note> They come to witness the shame of the second
<pb n="375"/><anchor id="Pg375"/>city in the world, which, in the wantonness of prosperity, has
lost the temperate dignity and orderly calm that are the real
glory of a great people.
</p>

<p>
As a foil to the feverish life of luxury, quarrelsome rivalry,
and vulgar excitement which prevailed in the great towns,
Dion has left a prose idyll to idealise the simple pleasures and
virtues of the country.<note place="foot">See an excellent analysis of this
piece (vii.) in Mahaffy’s <hi rend="italic">Greek World
under Roman Sway</hi>, pp. 277-288.</note> It is also a dirge over the decay
of Greece, when crops were being reaped in the agora of historic
cities, and the tall grasses grew around the statues of gods and
heroes of the olden time.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. § 34 sqq.</note> A traveller, cast ashore in the wreck
of his vessel on the dreaded Hollows of Euboea, was sheltered, in
a rude, warm-hearted fashion, by some peasants. Their fathers
had been turned adrift in the confiscation of the estate of a
great noble in some trouble with the emperor, and they had
made themselves a lonely home on a pastoral slope, close to a
stream, with the neighbouring shade of trees. They had taken
into tillage a few fields around their huts; they drove their
cattle to the high mountain pastures in summer time, and in
the winter they turned to hunting the game along the snowy
tracks. Of city life they know hardly anything. One of them,
indeed, had been twice in the neighbouring town, and he tells
what he saw there in a lively way. It is all a mere shadow
or caricature of the old civic life of Greece. There are the
rival orators, patriot or demagogue, the frivolous and capricious
crowd, the vote of the privilege of dining in the town-hall. The
serious purpose of the piece, however, is to idealise the simple
virtue and happiness of the country folk, and to discuss the
disheartening problem of the poor in great cities.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> §§ 105-108.</note> It is in
the main the problem of our modern urban life, and Dion had
evidently thought deeply about it, and was an acute observer
of the social misery which is the same from age to age.
Fortified by the divine Homer and ordinary experience, he
points out that the poor are more generous and helpful to the
needy than are the rich out of their ample store. Too often
the seeming bounty of the wealthy benefactor is of the nature
of a loan, which is to be returned with due interest.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> §§ 82-89,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">αἱ γὰρ δὴ φιλοφρονήσεις καὶ χάριτες, ἐὰν σκοπῇ τις ὀρθῶς, οὐδὲν διαφέρουσιν
ἐράνων καὶ δανείων</foreign>.</note> The
struggles and temptations of the poor in great cities suggest a
<pb n="376"/><anchor id="Pg376"/>discussion of the perpetual problem of prostitution, which
probably no ancient writer ever faced so boldly. The double
degradation of humanity, which it involved in the ancient world,
is powerfully painted;<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. § 133; Musonius,
Stob. <hi rend="italic">Flor.</hi> vi. 61; cf. on this
subject Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées Morales</hi>, etc. ii. p.
134.</note> and the plea that the indulgence in venal
immorality is the only alternative to insidious attacks on family
virtue is discussed with singular firmness and yet delicacy of
touch.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. § 139.</note> The same detachment from contemporary prejudice is
shown in Dion’s treatment of slavery. He sees its fell effects
on the masters, in producing sensuality, languor, and helpless
dependence on others for the slightest services. He points
out that there is no criterion afforded by nature to distinguish
slave and free. The so-called free man of the highest rank
may be the offspring of a servile amour, and the so-called slave
may be ingenuous in every sense, condemned to bondage by an
accident of fortune.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x. § 13; xv. § 5; 6, 31; cf.
Juv. xiv. 16; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ben.</hi> iii. 21; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
47; cf. Denis, ii. 152; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel.
Rom.</hi> ii. p. 354.</note> Just as external freedom does not imply
moral worth, so legal enslavement does not imply moral degradation.<note place="foot">Cf. Newman’s <hi rend="italic">Politics of Aristotle</hi>,
Introd. p. 144.</note>
If moral justice always fixed the position of men
in society by their deserts, master and slave would often have
to change places.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xv. § 31.</note> In Dion’s judgment as to the enervating
effects of slavery on the slave-owning class, and the absence of
any moral or mental distinction to justify the institution, he
is in singular harmony with Seneca.
</p>

<p>
The similarity of tone between Seneca and Dion is perhaps
even more marked in their treatment of monarchy. Inherited,
like so much else, from the great Greek thinkers of the fifth
and fourth centuries <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, the ideal of a beneficent and unselfish
prince, the true <q>shepherd of the people,</q> the antithesis of
the lawless and sensual tyrant, had become, partly, no
doubt, through the influence of the schools of rhetoric, a
common possession of cultivated minds. Vespasian gave it
a certain reality, if his son Domitian showed how easily the
king might pass into the tyrant. The dream of an earthly
providence, presiding over the Roman world, dawned in more
durable splendour with the accession of Trajan, and Pliny,
his panegyrist, has left us a sketch of the patriot prince,
<pb n="377"/><anchor id="Pg377"/>which is almost identical with the lines of Dion’s ideal.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> i. § 13; ii. §§ 75-77;
iii. § 39, 62, 107; iv. § 63; cf. Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Paneg.</hi> 72, 80, 67; Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 13,
§ 4; i. 19, § 2.</note>
Both Dion and Pliny were favourites of Trajan, and some of
Dion’s orations were delivered before his court. As a court
preacher, he justly boasts that he is no mere flatterer, although
we may suspect that his picture of the ideal monarch might
have been interpreted as drawn from the character of Trajan,
just as his picture of the tyrant was probably suggested by
Domitian.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> i. § 79; cf. iii. §§ 5, 6.</note> Still, we may well believe the orator when he
says that the man who had bearded the one at the cost of
long exile and penury, was not likely to flatter the other for
the gold or honours which he despised. And in these
discourses, Dion seems full of the sense of a divine mission.
Once, on his wanderings, he lost his way somewhere on the
boundaries of Arcadia, and, ascending a knoll to recover the
track, he found himself before a rude, ruined shrine of
Heracles, hung with votive offerings of the chase.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. § 52.</note> An aged
woman sat by them who told him that she had a spirit of
divination from the gods. The shepherds and peasants used
to come to her with questions about the fate of their flocks
and crops. And she now entrusted Dion with a message to
the great ruler of many men whom she prophesied Dion was
soon to meet.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 56.</note> It was a tale of Heracles, the great benefactor
of men from the rising to the setting sun, who, by his simple
strength, crushed all lawless monsters and gave the world
an ordered peace. His father inspired him with noble
impulse for his task by oracle and omen, and sent Hermes
once, when Heracles was still a boy at Thebes, to show him
the vision of the Two Peaks, and strengthen him in his virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 66.</note>
They rose from the same rocky roots, amid precipitous crags
and deep ravines, and the noise of many waters. At first they
seemed to be one mountain mass, but they soon parted wide
asunder, the one being sacred to Zeus, the other to the lawless
Typhon. On the one crest, rising into the cloudless ether,
Kingship sits enthroned, in the likeness of a fair, stately
woman, clad in robes of glistening white, and wielding a
sceptre of brighter and purer metal than any silver or gold.
Under her steady gaze of radiant dignity, the good felt a
<pb n="378"/><anchor id="Pg378"/>cheerful confidence, the bad quailed and shrank away. She
was surrounded by handmaidens of a beauty like her own,
Justice and Peace and Order. The paths to the other peak
were many and secret, and skirted an abyss, streaming with
blood or choked with corpses. Its top was wrapped in mist
and cloud, and there sat Tyranny on a far higher and more
pompous throne, adorned with gold and ivory and many a
gorgeous colour, but a throne rocking and unstable. She
strove to make herself like to Kingship, but it was all mere
hollow pretence. Instead of the gracious smile, there was a
servile, hypocritical leer; instead of the glance of dignity,
there was a savage scowl. And around her sat a throng
bearing ill-omened names, Cruelty and Lust, Lawlessness and
Flattery and Sedition. On a question from Hermes, the
youthful Heracles made his choice, and his father gave him
his commission to be the saviour of men.
</p>

<p>
In this fashion Dion, like Aeschylus, recasts old myth to
make it the vehicle of moral instruction, just as he finds in
Homer the true teacher of kings.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> iv. § 39.</note> The theory of ideal monarchy
is developed at such length as may have somewhat wearied
the emperor. But it really is based on a few great principles.
True kings, in Homer’s phrase, are sons of Zeus, and they are
shepherds of the people. All genuine political power rests on
virtue, and ultimately on the favour of Heaven. A king is
appointed by God to work the good of his subjects. And, as
his authority is divine, an image on earth of the sovereignty of
Zeus, the monarch will be a scrupulously religious man in the
highest sense,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. §§ 51, 62,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ ἄρχειν οὐδαμῶς ῥᾴθυμον ἀλλ’ ἐπίπονον κτλ.</foreign></note> not merely by offering costly sacrifices, but by
righteousness, diligence, and self-sacrifice in performing the duties
of his solemn charge. The many titles addressed to Father Zeus
represent so many aspects of royal activity and virtue. The
true prince will be the father of his people, surrounded and
guarded by a loving reverence, which never degenerates into
fear. His only aim will be their good. He will keep sleepless
watch over the weak, the careless, those who are heedless for
themselves. Commanding infinite resources, he will know less
of mere pleasure than any man within his realm. With such
immense responsibilities, he will be the most laborious of all.
His only advantage over the private citizen is in his boundless
<pb n="379"/><anchor id="Pg379"/>command of friendship; for all men must be well-wishers to
one wielding such a beneficent power, with whom, from his
conception of his mission, they must feel an absolute identity
of interest. And the king’s greatest need is friendship, to
provide him with myriads of hands and eyes in the vast work
of government.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> iii. §§ 38, 88, 107.</note> Herein lies the sharpest contrast between the
true king and the tyrant, a contrast which was a commonplace
in antiquity, but which was stamped afresh by the juxtaposition
of the reign of Domitian and the reign of Trajan. The universal
hatred which pursued a bad Caesar even beyond the grave,
which erased his name from monuments and closed its eyes
even to intervals of serious purpose for the general weal, was a
terrible illustration of the lonely friendlessness of selfish power.<note place="foot">Sueton. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xxxiii.; <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> lx.
abolendam Caesarum memoriam ac diruenda
templa censuerunt; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
698, 699, 767, where the names of
Caligula and Domitian have been
erased.</note>
Instead of loyal and grateful friendship, the despot was mocked
by a venal flattery which was only its mimicry. The good
monarch will treat flatterers as false coiners who cause the
genuine currency to be suspected. This counsel and others of
Dion were often little regarded by succeeding emperors. Yet
even the last shadowy princes of the fifth century professed
themselves the guardians of the human race, and are oppressed
by an ideal of universal beneficence which they are impotent
to realise.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Nov. Valent.</hi> tit. viii.; <hi rend="italic">Leg. Anthem.</hi>
tit. i.; <hi rend="italic">Nov. Mart.</hi> ii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hitherto we have been occupied with the preaching of
Dion on personal conduct, the reform of civic life, or the
duties of imperial power. It cannot be said that he discusses
these subjects without reference to religious beliefs and
aspirations.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> vii. § 135, where the
gods of pure wedlock are appealed to
against vagrant vice.</note> But religion is rather in the background; the
reverence for the Heavenly Powers is rather assumed as a
necessary basis for human life rightly ordered. There is one
oration, however, of supreme interest to the modern mind, in
which Dion goes to the root of all religion, and examines the
sources of belief in God and the justification of anthropomorphic
imagery in representing Him. This utterance was
called forth by a visit to Olympia when Dion was advanced
in years.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xii. § 20.</note> The games of Olympia were a dazzling and
<pb n="380"/><anchor id="Pg380"/>inspiring spectacle, and the multitude which gathered there
from all parts of the world was a splendid audience. But,
with the sound of the sacred trumpet, and the herald’s voice,
proclaiming the victor, in his ears, Dion turns away from all
the glory of youthful strength and grace, even from the
legendary splendour of the great festival,<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 26.</note> to the majestic
figure of the Olympian Zeus, which had been graved by the
hand of Pheidias more than 500 years before, and to the
thoughts of the divine world which it suggested. That
greatest triumph of idealism in plastic art, inspired by
famous lines in the <hi rend="italic">Iliad</hi>, was, by the consent of all antiquity,
the masterpiece of Pheidias. Ancient writers of many ages
are lost in admiration of the mingled majesty and benignity
which the divine effigy expressed. To the eyes of Lucian it
seemed <q>the very son of Kronos brought down to earth, and
set to watch over the lonely plain of Elis.</q><note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Sacrif.</hi> 11,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἴονται ὁρᾶν ... αὐτὸν τὸν Κρόνου καὶ Ῥέας εἰς τὴν γῆν
ὑπὸ Φειδίου μετῳκισμένον καὶ τὴν Πισαίων ἐρημίαν ἐπισκοπεῖν
κεκελευσμένον</foreign>.</note> There it sat
watching for more than 800 years, till it was swept away in
the fierce, final effort to dethrone the religion of the past.
Yet the majestic image, which attracted the fury of the
iconoclasts of the reign of Theodosius, inspired Dion with
thoughts of the Divine nature which travelled far beyond the
paganism either of poetry or of the crowd. It was not merely
the masterpiece of artistic and constructive skill which had
fascinated the gaze, and borne the vicissitudes, of so many
centuries, that moved his admiration; it was also, and more,
the moral effect of that miracle of art on the spectator. The
wildest and fiercest of the brute creation might be calmed and
softened by the air of majestic peace and kindness which
floated around the gold and ivory. <q>Whosoever among
mortal men is most utterly toil-worn in spirit, having drunk
the cup of many sorrows and calamities, when he stands before
this image, methinks, must utterly forget all the terrors and
woes of this mortal life.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 51,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">άνθρώπων δέ, ὃς ἂν ῃ παντελῶς ἐπίπονὰς τὴν ψυχήν,
πολλὰς ἀπαντλήσας ξυμφορὰς καὶ λύπας ἐν τῷ βίῳ ...
καὶ ὃς δοκεῖ μοι κατεναντίον στὰς τῆσδε τῆς εἰκόνος ἐκλαθέσθαι
πάντων ὅσα ἐν ἀνθρωπίνῳ βίῳ δεινὰ καὶ χαλεπὰ
γίγνεται παθεῖν.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
But the thoughts of Dion, in presence of the majestic
figure at Olympia, take a wider range. His theme is nothing
<pb n="381"/><anchor id="Pg381"/>less than the sources of our idea of God, and the place of art in
religion. He pours his scorn upon hedonistic atheism. Our
conception of God is innate, original, universal among all the
races of men.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. §§ 27, 28, 33, 42; cf. Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 117, § 6, omnibus insita de dis
opinio est.</note> It is the product of the higher reason, contemplating
the majestic order, minute adaptation, and beneficent
provision for human wants in the natural world. In
that great temple, with its alternations of gloom and splendour,
its many voices of joy or of terror, man is being perpetually
initiated in the Great Mysteries, on a grander scale than at
Eleusis, with God Himself to preside over the rites. The
belief in God depends in the first instance on no human
teaching, any more than does the love of child to parent.
But this original intuition and belief in divine powers finds
expression through the genius of inspired poets; it is reinforced
by the imperative prescriptions of the founders and lawgivers
of states; it takes external form in bronze or gold and ivory
or marble, under the cunning hand of the great artist; it is
developed and expounded by philosophy.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. §§ 42, 43.</note> Like all the
deepest thinkers of his time, Dion is persuaded of the certainty
of God’s existence, but he is equally conscious of the remoteness
of the Infinite Spirit, and of the weakness of all human
effort to approach, or to picture it to the mind of man. We
are to Dion like <q>children crying in the night, and with no
language but a cry.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 61,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὥσπερ νήπιοι παῖδες πατρὸς ἢ μητρὸς ἀπεσπασμένοι ...
ὀρέγουσι χεῖρας οὐ παροῦσι πολλάκις ὀνειρώττοντες κτλ.</foreign></note> Yet the child will strive to image
forth the face of the Father, although it is hidden behind a
veil which will never be withdrawn in this world. The
genius of poetry, commanding the most versatile power of
giving utterance to the religious imagination, is first in order
and in power. Law and institution follow in its wake. The
plastic arts, under cramping limitations, come later still to
body forth the divine dreams of the elder bards. Dion had
thought much on the relative power of poetry and the
sculptor’s art to give expression to the thoughts and feelings
of man about the Divine nature. The boundless power or
licence of language to find a symbol for every thought or
image on the phantasy is seen at its height in Homer, who
<pb n="382"/><anchor id="Pg382"/>riots in an almost lawless exercise of his gifts.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 62.</note> But the chief
importance of the discussion lies in an arraignment of Pheidias
for attempting to image in visible form the great Soul and
Ruler of the universe, Whom mortal eye has never seen and
can never see. His defence is very interesting, both as a
clear statement of the limitations of the plastic arts, and as a
justification of material images of the Divine.
</p>

<p>
Pheidias pleads in his defence that the artist could not, if
he would, desert the ancient religious tradition, which was
consecrated in popular imagination by the romance of poetry;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 56.</note>
that is fixed for ever. Granted that the Divine nature is far
removed from us, and far beyond our ken; yet, as little
children separated from their parents, feel a strong yearning
for them and stretch out their hands vainly in their dreams,
so the race of man, from love and kindred, longs ever to draw
nigh to the unseen God by prayer and sacrifice and visible
symbol. The ruder races will image their god in trees or shapeless
stones, or may seek a strange symbol in some of the lower
forms of animal life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 61; cf. Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi>
lxxi., lxxii., lxxvi.; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
Tyan.</hi> vi. 19; Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii.
§ 5.</note> The higher may find sublime expression
of His essence in the sun and starry spheres. For the pure
and infinite mind which has engendered and which sustains the
universe of life, no sculptor or painter of Hellas has ever found,
or can ever find, full and adequate expression.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 59,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">νοῦν γὰρ καὶ φρόνησιν αὐτὴν καθ’ αὑτὴν οὔτε τις πλάστης
οὔτε τις γραφεὺς εἰκάσαι δυνατὸς ἔσται</foreign>: Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> lxxix.</note> Hence men
take refuge in the vehicle and receptacle of the noblest spirit
known to them, the form of man. And the Infinite Spirit, of
which the human is an effluence, may perhaps best be embodied
in the form of His child.<note place="foot">Cf. Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii. § 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ μὲν Ἑλληνικὸν τιμᾶν τοὺς θεοὺς ἐνομίσε τῶν ἐν γῇ καλλίστοις,
ὕλῃ μὲν καθαρᾷμορφῇ δὲ ἀνθρωπίνῃ τέχνῃ δὲ ἀκριβεῖ</foreign>.</note> But no effort or ecstasy of artistic
fancy, in form or colour, can ever follow the track of the Homeric
imagination in its majesty and infinite variety of expression.
The sculptor and painter have fixed limits set to their skill,
beyond which they cannot pass. They can appeal only to the
eye; their material has not the infinite ductility and elasticity
of the poetic dialect of many tribes and many generations.
They can seize only a single moment of action or passion, and
fix it for ever in bronze or stone. Yet Pheidias, with a certain
<pb n="383"/><anchor id="Pg383"/>modest self-assertion, pleads that his conception of the Olympian
Zeus, although less various and seductive than Homer’s, although
he cannot present to the gazer the crashing thunderbolt or the
baleful star, or the heaving of Olympus, is perhaps more elevating
and inspiring.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 78.</note> The Zeus of Pheidias is the peace-loving
and gentle providence of an undisturbed and harmonious
Greece, the august giver of all good gifts, the father and
saviour and guardian of men. The many names by which
men call him may each find some answering trait in the
laborious work of the chisel. In the lines of that majestic
and benign image are shadowed forth the mild king and father,
the hearer of prayer, the guardian of civic order and family
love, the protector of the stranger, and the power who gives
fertile increase to flock and field. The Zeus of Pheidias and
of Dion is a God of mercy and peace, with no memory of the
wars of the Giants.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> §§ 74, 75.</note>
</p>

<p>
Dion is a popular teacher of morality, not a thinker or
theologian. But this excursion into the field of theology
shows him at his best. And it prepares us for the study of
some more formal efforts to find a theology in the poetry
of legend.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="384"/><anchor id="Pg384"/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. The philosophic theologian"/><index index="pdf" level1="III. The philosophic theologian"/>
<head>CHAPTER III</head>

<head type="sub">THE PHILOSOPHIC THEOLOGIAN</head>

<p>
The times were ripe for a theodicy. Religion of every mood
and tone, of every age and clime, was in the air, and philosophy
had abandoned speculation and turned to the direction of conduct
and spiritual life. The mission of philosophy is to find
the one in the many, and never did the religious life of men
offer a more bewildering multiplicity and variety, not to say
chaos, to the ordering power of philosophy. The scepticism
of the Neronian age had almost disappeared. The only
rationalists of any distinction in the second century were
Lucian and Galen.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. pp. 430, 435; cf. Thiersch, <hi rend="italic">Politik u. Phil. in ihrem
Verhältn. zur Religion</hi>, p. 9.</note> It was an age of imperious spiritual
cravings, alike among the cultivated and the vulgar. But
the thin abstractions of the old Latin faith and the brilliant
anthropomorphism of Greece had ceased to satisfy even the
crowd. It was an age with a longing for a religious system
less formal and coldly external, for a religion more satisfying
to the deeper emotions, a religion which should offer divine
help to human need and misery, divine guidance amid the
darkness of time; above all, a divine light in the mystery of
death. The glory of classic art had mysteriously closed. It
was an age rather of material splendour, and, at first sight, an
age of bourgeois ideals of parochial fame and mere enjoyment
of the hour. Yet the Antonine age has some claim to spiritual
distinction. In the dim, sub-conscious feelings of the masses,
as well as in the definite spiritual effort of the higher minds,
there was really a great movement towards a ruling principle
of conduct and a spiritual vision. Men often, indeed, followed
<pb n="385"/><anchor id="Pg385"/>the marsh-light through strange devious paths into wildernesses
peopled with the spectres of old-world superstition. But the
light of the Holy Grail had at last flashed on the eyes of some
loftier minds. From the early years of the second century we
can trace that great combined movement of the new Platonism
and the revived paganism,<note place="foot">Thiersch, <hi rend="italic">Politik und Philosophie
in ihrem Verhältniss zur Religion</hi>, pp.
14, 15.</note> which so long retarded the triumph
of the Church, and yet, in the Divinely-guided evolution, was
destined to prepare men for it.
</p>

<p>
The old religion had not lost all hold on men’s minds, as it is
sometimes said to have done, in rather too sweeping language.
The punctilious ritual with which, in the stately narrative of
Tacitus, the Capitol was restored by Vespasian, the pious care
with which the young Aurelius recited the Salian litany in
words no longer understood, the countless victims which he
offered to the guardian gods of Rome in evil days of pestilence
and doubtful war, these things reveal the strength of the
religion of Numa. Two centuries after M. Aurelius was in his
grave, the deities which had cradled the Roman state, and
watched over its career, were still objects of reverence to the
conservative circle of Symmachus. A religion which was
intertwined with the whole fabric of government and society,
which gave its sanction or benediction to every act and
incident in the individual life, which was omnipresent in game
and festival, in temple and votive monument, was placed far
beyond the influence of changing fashions of devotion. It
was a powerful stay of patriotism, a powerful bond of civic
and family life; it threw a charm of awe and old-world sanctity
around everything it touched. But for the deeper spiritual
wants and emotions it furnished little nutriment. To find
relief and cleansing from the sense of guilt, cheer and glad
exaltation of pious emotion, consolation in the common miseries
of life, and hope in the shadow of death, men had to betake
themselves to other systems. The oriental religions were pouring
in like a flood, and spreading over all the West. One
Antonine built a shrine of Mithra,<note place="foot">Réville, <hi rend="italic">Rel. unter den Sev.</hi> p. 81.</note> another took the tonsure
of Isis.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Commodus</hi>, c. 9.</note> The priests and acolytes of the Egyptian goddess
were everywhere, chanting their litanies in solemn processions
<pb n="386"/><anchor id="Pg386"/>along the streets, instructing and baptizing their catechumens,
and, in the alternating gloom and splendour of their mysteries,
bearing the entranced soul to the boundaries of life and death.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 11, 22.</note>
Mithra, <q>the Unconquered,</q> was justifying his name. In
every district from the Euxine to the Solway he brought a
new message to heathendom. Pure from all grossness of
myth, the Persian god of light came as the mediator and
comforter, to soothe the poor and broken-hearted, and give the
cleansing of the mystic blood. His hierarchy of the initiated,
his soothing symbolic sacraments, his gorgeous ritual, and his
promise of immortality to those who drank the mystic Haoma,
gratified and stimulated religious longings which were to find
their full satisfaction in the ministry of the Church.
</p>

<p>
But the religious imagination was not satisfied with historic
and accredited systems. Travel and conquest were adding to
the spiritual wealth or burden of the Roman race. In lonely
Alpine passes, in the deserts of Africa, or the Yorkshire dales,
in every ancient wood or secret spring which he passed in his
wanderings or campaigns, the Roman found hosts of new
divinities, possible helpers or possible enemies, whose favour
it was expedient to win.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 186, 193, 228 sqq., 275,
1637, 1580, 5873, 5879, 5887, 1993.</note> And, where he knew not their
strange outlandish names, he would try to propitiate them all
together under no name, or any name that pleased them.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 110, 111.</note>
And, as if this vague multitude of ghostly powers were not
large enough for devotion, the fecundity of imagination created
a host of genii, of haunting or guarding spirits, attached to
every place or scene, to every group or corporation of men
which had a place in Roman life. There were genii of the
secret spring or grove, of the camp, the legion, the cohort, of
the Roman people, above all, there was the genius of the
emperor.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6628 (fontis), 4922
(castrorum), 1704 (legionis), 1812
(Neronis), 3953 (Hadriani).</note> Apotheosis went on apace—apotheosis not merely
of the emperors, but of a theurgic philosopher like Apollonius,
of a minion like Antinous, of a mere impostor like Alexander
of Abonoteichos.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Alex. Sev.</hi> c. 29; Spart.
<hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 14, § 5; Luc. <hi rend="italic">Peregr.</hi> c. 29;
Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. pp. 454-456.
Thiersch, <hi rend="italic">Pol. u. Phil. in Verhältn.
zur Rel.</hi> p. 10.</note> Old oracles, which had been suppressed or
decadent in the reign of Nero, sprang into fresh life and
popularity in the reign of Trajan. New sources of oracular
<pb n="387"/><anchor id="Pg387"/>inspiration were opened, some of them challenging for the
time the ancient fame of Delphi or Dodona.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> 19; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sitteng.</hi>
iii. p. 470; Thiersch, p. 19.</note> According to
Lucian, oracles were pealing from every rock and every altar.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Deor. Conc.</hi> 12,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλὰ ἤδη πᾶς λίθος καὶ πᾶς βωμὸς ... χρησμῳδεῖ</foreign>.</note>
Every form of revelation or divination, every avenue of access
to the Divine, was eagerly sought for, or welcomed with pious
credulity. The study of omens and dreams was reduced to the
form of a pseudo-science by a host of writers like Artemidorus.
The sacred art of healing through visions of the night found a
home in those charming temples of Asclepius, which rose
beside so many hallowed springs, with fair prospect and genial
air, where the god revealed his remedy in dreams, and a lore
half hieratic, half medical, was applied to relieve the sufferer.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sitteng.</hi> iii. pp 474-478;
Wolff, <hi rend="italic">De Nov. Orac. Aetate</hi>, p. 29 sq.</note>
Miracles and special providences, the most marvellous or the
most grotesque, were chronicled with unquestioning faith, not
only by fanatics like Aelian, but by learned historians like
Tacitus and Suetonius. Tales of witchcraft and weird sorcery
are as eagerly believed at Trimalchio’s dinner-table<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 61, 62.</note> as in
lonely villages of Thessaly. On the higher level of the new
Pythagorean faith, everything is possible to the pure spirit.
To such a soul God will reveal Himself by many voices to
which gross human clay is deaf; the future lays bare its secrets;
nature yields up her hidden powers. Spiritual detachment
triumphs over matter and time; and the Pythagorean apostle
predicts a plague at Ephesus, casts out demons, raises the
dead, vanishes like a phantom from the clutches of Domitian.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> v. 12; iv.
5; iv. 10; vii. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
At a superficial glance, a state of religion such as has been
sketched might seem to be a mere bewildering chaos of infinitely
divided spiritual interest. Men seem to have adopted the
mythologies of every race, and to have superadded a new
mythology of positively boundless fecundity. A single votive
tablet will contain the names of the great gods of Latium and
Greece, of Persia, Commagene, and Egypt, and beside them,
strange names of British or Swiss, Celtic, Spanish, or Moorish
gods, and the vaguely-designated spirits who now seemed
to float in myriads around the scenes of human life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3070, 4316; viii. 9195;
viii. 4578, Jovi, Junoni, Minervae, Soli
Mithrae, Herculi, Marti, Genio loci,
Diis, Deabusque omnibus; cf. viii.
4578; vi. 504.</note> Yet,
<pb n="388"/><anchor id="Pg388"/>unperceived by the ordinary devotee, amid all this confused
ferment, a certain principle of unity or comprehension was
asserting its power. Although the old gods in Lucian’s piece
might comically complain that they were being crowded out
of Olympus by Mithra and Anubis and their barbarous company,<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Jup. Trag.</hi> 8, 9; <hi rend="italic">Deor. Conc.</hi>
8 sqq.</note>
there was really little jealousy or repulsion among the
pagan cults. Ancient ritual was losing its precision of outline;
the venerable deities of classical myth were putting off
the decided individuality which had so long distinguished them
in the popular imagination.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. T.</hi> vi. 40; Baumgart,
<hi rend="italic">Aristides als Repräsentant der
Soph. Rhet.</hi> pp. 62, 84; cf. Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi>
xi. c. 5; Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 17.</note> The provinces and attributes
of kindred deities melted into one another and were finally
identified; syncretism was in the air. Without the unifying
aid of philosophy, ordinary piety was effecting unconsciously
a vast process of simplification which tended to ideal unity.
In the Sacred Orations of Aristides, Poseidon, Athene, Serapis,
Asclepius, are dropping the peculiar powers by which they
were so long known, and rising, without any danger of collision,
to all-embracing sway. So, the Isis of Apuleius, the <q>goddess
of myriad names,</q> in her vision to Lucius, boldly claims
to be <q>Queen of the world of shades, first of the inhabitants
of Heaven, in whom all gods find their unchanging type.</q><note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. cc. 3-6.</note>
Of course, to the very end, the common superstitious devotion
of the masses was probably little influenced by the great
spiritual movement which, in the higher strata, was moulding
heathen faith into an approach to monotheism. The simple
peasant still clung to his favourite deity, as his Catholic
descendant has to-day his favourite saint. But it is in the
higher minds that the onward sweep of great spiritual movements
can really be discerned. The initiation of Apuleius in
all the mysteries, the reverent visits of Apollonius to every
temple and oracle from the Ganges to the Guadalquivir, the
matins of Alexander Severus in a chapel which enshrined the
images of Abraham and Orpheus, of Apollonius and Christ;<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Alex. Sev.</hi> c. 29.</note>
these, and many other instances of all-embracing devotion,
point forward to the goal of that Platonist théodicée which it
is the purpose of this chapter to expound.
</p>

<p>
The spectacle of an immense efflorescence of pure paganism,
<pb n="389"/><anchor id="Pg389"/>most of it born of very mundane fears and hopes and desires,
to men like Lucian was a sight which might, according to the
mood, move to tears or laughter. But the same great impulse
which drove the multitude into such wild curiosity of superstition,
was awaking loftier conceptions of the Divine, and
feelings of purer devotion in the educated. And sometimes
the very highest and the very lowest developments of the
protean religious instinct may be seen in a single mind. Was
there ever such a combination of the sensualist imagination
with the ideal of ascetic purity, of the terrors and dark arts
of anile superstition with the mystic vision of God, as in the
soul of Apuleius? The painter of the foulest scenes in ancient
literature seems to have cherished the faith in a heavenly King,
First Cause of all nature, Father of all living things,<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> c. 64 (536), totius
naturae causa et ratio, summus animi
genitor, aeternus animantum sospitator
... neque tempore neque loco neque
vice ulla comprehensus, nemini effabilis;
cf. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 25; Denis, <hi rend="italic">Hist.
des Idées Morales</hi>, ii. p. 264.</note> Saviour of
spirits, beyond the range of time and change, remote, ineffable.
The prayer of thanksgiving to Isis might, <hi rend="italic">mutatis mutandis</hi>, be
almost offered in a Christian church. The conception of the
unity and purity of the Divine One was the priceless conquest
of Greek philosophy, and pre-eminently of Plato. It had
been brought home to the Roman world by the teaching of
Stoicism. But there is a new note in the monotheism of
the first and second centuries of the Empire. God is no
longer a mere intellectual postulate, the necessary crown
and lord of a great cosmic system. He has become a moral
necessity. His existence is demanded by the heart as well as
by the intellect. Men craved no longer for a God to explain
the universe, but to resolve the enigma of their own lives; not
a blind force, moving on majestically and mercilessly to <q>some
far-off event,</q> but an Infinite Father guiding in wisdom,
cherishing in mercy, and finally receiving His children to
Himself. This is the conception of God which, from Seneca
to M. Aurelius, is mastering the best minds, both Stoic and
Platonist.<note place="foot">Thiersch, <hi rend="italic">Pol. u. Phil. in ihrem
Verhältn. zur Rel.</hi> p. 21, man nennt den
Marcus einen Stoiker.... Aber
seine Dogmatik und seine ganze Seelenbestimmung
gehört schon weit mehr
dem Neoplatonismus an. Cf. Bussell,
<hi rend="italic">School of Plato</hi>, pp. 278-290.</note> Seneca, as we have seen in a former chapter, often
speaks in the hard tones of the older Stoicism. Sometimes
<pb n="390"/><anchor id="Pg390"/>God, Nature, Fate, Jupiter, are identical terms<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iv. 7.</note>. But the
cold, materialistic conception of God is irreconcilable with
many passages in his writings. Like Epictetus and M. Aurelius,
Seneca is often far more emotional, we may say, far more
modern, than his professed creed. The materialistic <hi rend="italic">Anima
Mundi</hi>, interfused with the universe and the nature of man,
becomes the infinitely benign Creator, Providence, and Guardian,
the Father, and almost the Friend of men. He is the Author
of all good, never of evil: He is gentle and pitiful, and to
attribute to Him storm or pestilence or earthquake or the
various plagues of human life is an impiety. These things are
the result of physical law. To such a God boundless gratitude
is due for His goodness, resignation in the wise chastenings of
His hand. He chastises whom he loves. In bereavement, He
takes only what He has given. He is our ready helper in
every moral effort; no goodness is possible without His succour.
In return for all His benefits, He asks for no costly material
offerings, no blood of victims, no steaming incense, no adulation
in prayer. Faith in God is the true worship of Him. If you
wish to propitiate Him, imitate His goodness. And for the
elect soul the day of death is a birthday of eternity, when the
load of corporeal things is shaken off, and the infinite splendour
of the immortal life spreads out with no troubling shadow.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p. 649.
Cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 10, § 5; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 73, § 16; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
41, § 2; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 63, § 7; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 83, § 1; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
95, § 50; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 102, § 28, nulla serenum
umbra turbabit; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> iv. 7; <hi rend="italic">De
Ira</hi>, ii. 27; <hi rend="italic">De Clem.</hi> i. 7; <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> 1.
29.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hardly less striking is the warmth of devout feeling which
suffuses the moral teaching of Epictetus and M. Aurelius.
They have not indeed abandoned the old Stoic principle that
man’s final good depends on the rectitude of the will. But
the Stoic sage is no longer a solitary athlete, conquering by
his proud unaided strength, and in his victory rising almost
superior to Zeus. Growing moral experience had taught
humility, and inspired the sense of dependence on a Higher
Power in sympathy with man.<note place="foot">Epict. i. 9, § 7,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ δὲ τὸν θεὸν ποιητὴν ἔχειν καὶ πατέρα καὶ κηδεμόνα,
οὐκέτι ἡμᾶς ἐξαιρήσεται λυπῶν καὶ φόβων</foreign>: cf. i. 3, § 3; Denis, <hi rend="italic">Hist. des
Idées Morales</hi>, ii. p. 241.</note> No true Stoic, of course,
could ever forget the Divine element within each human soul
which linked it with the cosmic soul, and through which man
might bring himself into harmony with the great polity of
<pb n="391"/><anchor id="Pg391"/>gods and men. But, somehow, the Divine Power immanent in
the world, from a dim, cold, impalpable law or fate or impersonal
force, slowly rounds itself off into a Being, if not
apart from man, at any rate his superior, his Creator and
Guardian, nay, in the end, his Father, from whom he comes,
to whom he returns at death. Some may think this a decline
from the lofty plane of the older school. The answer is that the
earlier effort to find salvation through pure reason in obedience
to the law of the whole, although it may have been magnificent,
was not a working religion for man as he is constituted. The
eternal involution of spirit and matter in the old Stoic creed,
the cold, impersonal, unknowable power, which, under whatever
name, Law, Reason, Fate, Necessity, permeates the universe,
necessarily exclude the idea of design, of providence, of moral
care for humanity. The unknown Power which claims an
absolute obedience, has no aid or recognition for his worshipper.
The monism of the old Stoics breaks down. The human
spirit, in striving to realise its unity with the Universal Spirit,
realises with more and more intensity the perpetual opposition
of matter and spirit, while it receives no aid in the conflict from
the power which ordains it; it <q>finds itself alone in an alien
world.</q> The true Stoic has no real object of worship. If he
addresses the impassive centre and soul of his universe, sometimes
in the rapturous tones of loving devotion, it is only a
pathetic illusion born of the faiths of the past, or inspired by a
dim forecast of the faiths of the coming time. How could the
complex of blind forces arouse any devotion? It demanded
implicit submission and self-sacrifice, but it gave no help,
save the name of a Divine element in the human soul; it
furnished no inspiring example to the sage in the conflicts of
passion, under obloquy, obstruction, and persecution. Meanwhile,
in this forlorn struggle, the human character was through
stress and storm developing new powers and virtues, lofty
courage in the face of lawless power, pious resignation to the
blows of fortune, gentle consideration and mercy even for
slaves and the outcasts of society, ideals of purity unknown to
the ancient world in its prime. The sage might, according to
orthodox theory, rest in a placid content of rounded perfection.
But human nature is not so constituted. In proportion to
spiritual progress is the force of spiritual longings; <hi rend="italic">beati
<pb n="392"/><anchor id="Pg392"/>mundo corde, ipsi Deum videbunt</hi>. The fruitful part of
Stoicism as a religion was the doctrine that the human reason
is a part of the soul of the world, a spark of the Divine mind.
At first this was only conceived in the fashion of a materialistic
pantheism.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, pp.
179, 184.</note> The kindred between the individual and the
general soul was little more than a physical doctrine. But it
developed in minds like Epictetus and Seneca a profound
spiritual meaning; it tapped the source of all real religion.
Pure reason can never solve the religious problem. The
history of religions shows that a conception of God which is
to act effectually on composite human nature is never reached
by the speculative intellect. What reason cannot do is effected
by the <q>sub-conscious self,</q><note place="foot">James, <hi rend="italic">Varieties of Religious Belief</hi>,
pp. 511, 512.</note> which is the dim seat of the
deeper intuitions, haunted by vague memories, hereditary
pieties, and emotional associations, the spring of strange
genius, of heroic sacrifice, of infinite aspiration. There throbs
the tide <q>which drew from out the boundless deep.</q> Thus
the Stoic of the later time became a mystic, in the sense
that <q>by love and emotion he solved the dualism of
the world.</q><note place="foot">Bussell, <hi rend="italic">School of Plato</hi>, p. 296.</note> God is no longer a mere physical law or
force, however subtilised, sweeping on in pitiless impetus or
monotony of cyclic change. God is within the human soul,
not as a spark of empyreal fire, but as the voice of conscience,
the spiritual monitor and comforter, the <q>Holy Spirit,</q><note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 41, § 2, sacer intra nos
spiritus sedet.</note>
prompting, guarding, consoling in life and death. God is no
longer found so much in the ordered movement of the
spheres and the recurring processes or the cataclysms of the
material universe. He is heard in the still small voice.
It is thus that the later Stoicism melts into the revived
Platonism.
</p>

<p>
Probably Seneca and Epictetus, had they been interrogated,
would have loyally resolved their most rapturous and devout
language into the cold terms of Stoic orthodoxy. But the
emotional tone is a really new element in their teaching, and
the language of spiritual abandonment, joyful resignation to a
Higher Will, free and cheerful obedience to it in the confidence
of love, would be absurdly incongruous if addressed to an
<pb n="393"/><anchor id="Pg393"/>abstract law or physical necessity.<note place="foot">Yet cf. Zeller, iii. 1, p. 649, der göttliche
Beistand, welchen er verlangt, ist
kein übernatürlicher. Seneca had
broken away unconsciously from the
old Stoic idea of God, more than Zeller
will admit, or his words have no
meaning.</note> The fatherhood of God
and the kinship of all men as His sons is the fundamental
principle of the new creed, binding us to do nothing unworthy
of such an ancestry.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, §§ 51, 52.</note> At other times we are soldiers of God
in a war with evil, bound to military obedience, awaiting calmly
the last signal to retreat from the scene of struggle.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 107, § 9; Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 24.</note> The
infinite benevolence of God is asserted in the face of all appearances
to the contrary. This of course is all the easier to one
trained in the doctrine that the external fortune of life has
nothing to do with man’s real happiness. The fear of God is
banished by the sense of His perfect love. The all-seeing eye,
the all-embracing providence, leave no room for care or foreboding.
The Stoic optimism is now grounded on a personal
trust in a loving and righteous will: <q>I am Thine, do with me
what Thou wilt.</q> <q>For all things work together for good to
them who love Him.</q> The external sufferings and apparent
wrongs of the obedient sons of God are no stumbling-blocks to
faith.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 20, § 11,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">κακὸς γείτων; Αὑτῷ· ἀλλ’ ἐμοὶ ἀγαθός· γυμνάζει μου τὸ εὔγνωμον,
    τὸ ἐπιεικές</foreign>: iv.
1, § 89; M. Aurel. vi. 44.</note> The great heroic example, Heracles, the son of Zeus,
was sorely tried by superhuman tasks, and won his crown of
immortality through toil and battle. <q>Whom He loves He
chastens.</q> Even apparent injustice is only an education through
suffering. These things are <q>only light afflictions</q> to him who
sees the due proportions of things and knows Zeus as his father.
Even to the poor, the lame, the blind, if they have the divine
love, the universe is a great temple, full of mystery and joy,
and each passing day a festival. In the common things of life,
in ploughing, digging, eating, we should sing hymns to God.
<q>What else can I do,</q> says Epictetus, <q>a lame old man, than sing
His praise, and exhort all men to join in the same song?</q><note place="foot"><anchor id="Note393-5"/>Epict. i. 16, § 20,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τί γὰρ ἄλλο δύναμαι γέρων χωλὸς εἰ μὴ ὑμνεῖν τὸν θεόν; κτλ.</foreign></note>
Who shall say what depth of religious emotion, veiled under old-world
phrase, there was in that outburst of M. Aurelius: <q>All
harmonises with me which is in harmony with thee, O Universe.
Nothing for me is too early nor too late which is in due season
for thee.... For thee are all things, in thee are all things,
<pb n="394"/><anchor id="Pg394"/>to thee all things return. The poet says, Dear City of Cecrops;
and wilt not thou say, Dear City of Zeus?</q><note place="foot">M. Aurel. iv. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
The attitude of such souls to external worship in every
age may be easily divined without the evidence of their words.
If God is good and wishes only the good of His creatures,
then to seek to appease His wrath and avert His capricious
judgments becomes an impiety. If men’s final good lies in
the moral sphere, in justice, gentleness, temperance, obedience
to the higher order, then prayer for external goods, for mere
indulgences of sense or ambition, shows a hopeless misconception
as to the nature of God and the supreme destiny of
man.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ix. 40; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 10, § 5.</note> On the other hand, without giving up the doctrine
that the highest good depends on the virtuous will, the later
Stoics and Platonists have begun to feel that man needs
support and inspiration in his moral struggles from a higher
Power, a Power without him and beyond him, yet who is allied
to him in nature and sympathy. Prayer is no longer a means
of winning temporal good things <q>for which the worthy need
not pray, and which the unworthy will not obtain.</q> It is a
fortifying communion with the Highest, an act of thanksgiving
for blessings already received, an inspiration for a fuller and
diviner life.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 40,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὦδε εὔχομαι, ὦ θεοί, δοίετέ μοι τὰ ὀφειλόμενα</foreign>.
Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xi. 8,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλὰ σὺ μὲν ἠγεῖ τὴν τοῦ φιλοσόφου εὐχὴν αἴτησιν εἶναι τῶν οὐ παρόντων·
    ἐγὼ δὲ ὁμιλίαν καὶ διάλεκτον πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς περὶ τῶν παρόντων
    καὶ ἐπίδειξιν τῆς ἀρητῆς</foreign>.</note> It is an effort of gratitude and adoration to draw
from the Divine source of all moral strength.
</p>

<p>
It must always remain to moderns an enigma how souls
living in such a spiritual world refused to break with heathen
idolatry. Seneca, indeed, poured contempt on the grossness
of myth in a lost treatise on superstition;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> preserved in S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ.
Dei</hi>, vi. 10.</note> and he had no
liking for the external rites of worship. But in some
strange way M. Aurelius reconciled punctilious devotion to
the popular gods with an austere pantheism or monotheism.
It is in Platonists such as Dion or Maximus of Tyre that
we meet with an attempted apology for anthropomorphic
symbolism of the Divine.<note place="foot">D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 24 (412 R);
Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii. 10.</note> The justification lies in the vast
gulf which separates the remote, ineffable, and inconceivable
purity of God from the feebleness and grossness of man. Few
<pb n="395"/><anchor id="Pg395"/>are they who can gaze in unaided thought on the Divine
splendour unveiled. Images, rites, and sacred myth have
been invented by the wisdom of the past, to aid the memory
and the imagination of weak ordinary souls. The symbols
have varied with the endless variety of races. Animals or
trees, mountain or river, rude unhewn stones, or the miracles of
Pheidias in gold and ivory, are simply the sign or picture by
which the soul is pointed to the Infinite Essence which has
never been seen by mortal eye or imaged in human phantasy.
The symbol which appeals to one race may be poor and contemptible
in the eyes of another. The animal worship of
Egypt gave a shock to minds which were lifted heavenwards by
the winning majesty of the Virgin Goddess or of the Zeus of
Olympia. The human form, as the chosen tabernacle of an
effluence of the Divine Spirit, might well seem to Dion and
Maximus the noblest and most fitting symbol of religious
worship. Yet, in the end, they are all ready to tolerate any
aberration of religious fancy which is justified by its use.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii. §§ 5-10;
Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> vi. 19.</note>
The most perfect symbol is only a faint adumbration of <q>the
Father and Creator of all, Who is older than the sun and
heavens, stronger than time and the ages and the fleeting
world of change, unnamed by any lawgiver, Whom tongue
cannot express nor eye see. Helpless to grasp His real
essence, we seek a stay in names or images, in beast or
plant, in river or mountain, in lustrous forms of gold and
silver and ivory. Whatever we have of fairest we call by His
name. And for love of Him, we cling, as lovers are wont, to
anything which recalls Him. I quarrel not with divers
imagery, if we seek to know, to love, to remember Him.</q><note place="foot">Max. Tyr. viii. 10,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐ νεμεσῶ τῆς διαφωνίας, ἴστωσαν μόνον, ἐράτωσαν μόνον,
    μνημονευέτωσαν μόνον</foreign>.</note>
This is the outburst of a tolerant and eclectic Platonism, ready
to condone everything in the crudest religious imagery. But
a more conscientious scrutiny even of Grecian legend demanded,
as we shall see, a deeper solution to account for dark rites and
legends which cast a shadow on the Infinite Purity.
</p>

<p>
The Stoic theology, which resolved the gods of legend into
thin abstractions, various potencies of the Infinite Spirit
interfused with the universe,<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
299 sqq.; S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, vi. 5.</note> was in some respects congenial
<pb n="396"/><anchor id="Pg396"/>to the Roman mind, and reflected the spirit of old Roman
religion. That religion of arid abstractions, to which no myth,
no haunting charm of poetic imagination attached,<note place="foot">Mommsen, <hi rend="italic">Hist. of Rome</hi>, i. p. 183
(Tr.); Preller, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Myth.</hi> p. 2.</note> easily lent
itself to a system which explained the gods by allegory or
physical rationalism. That was not an eirenicon for the
second century, at least among thoughtful, pious men. The
philosophic effort of so many centuries had ended in an
eclecticism for purely moral culture, and a profound scepticism
as to the attainment of higher truth by unaided reason.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, pp.
18-20.</note> Mere
intellectual curiosity, the desire of knowledge for its own sake,
and the hope of attaining it, are strangely absent from the
loftiest minds, from Seneca, Epictetus, and M. Aurelius.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 117, §§ 19-30; Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi>
i. 17; M. Aurel. vii. 67. But cf. viii.
13; xii. 14; viii. 3.</note> Men
like Lucian, sometimes in half melancholy, half scornful derision,
amused themselves with ridiculing the chaotic results of the
intellectual ambition of the past.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Hermot.</hi> c. 25, 34, 37 sqq.</note> They equally recognised
the immense force of that spiritual movement which was
trying every avenue of accredited religious system or novel
superstition, that might perchance lead the devotee to some
glimpse of the divine world. And side by side with the
recrudescence of old-world superstitions, there were spreading,
from whatever source, loftier and more ethical conceptions of
God, a dim sense of sin and human weakness, a need of
cleansing and support from a Divine hand. Stoicism, with all
its austere grandeur, had failed in its interpretation both of
man and of God. Popular theology, however soothing to old
associations and unregenerate feelings, often gave a shock to
the quickened moral sense and the higher spiritual intuitions.
Yet the venerable charm of time-honoured ritual, glad or
stately, the emotional effects and dim promise of revelation in
the mysteries of many shrines, the seductive allurements of new
cults, with a strange blending of the sensuous and the mystic,
all wove around the human soul such an enchanted maze of
spiritual fascination that escape was impossible, even if it were
desired. But it was no longer desired even by the highest
intellects. The efforts of pure reason to solve the mystery of
God and of man’s destiny had failed. Yet men were ever
<q>feeling after God, if haply they might find Him.</q> And the
<pb n="397"/><anchor id="Pg397"/>God whom they sought for was one on whom they might hang,
in whom they might have rest. Where was the revelation to
come from? Where was the mediator to be sought to reconcile
the ancient faiths or fables with a purified conception of the
Deity and the aspiration for a higher moral life?
</p>

<p>
The revived Pythagorean and Platonist philosophy which
girded itself to attempt the solution was really part of a great
spiritual movement, with its focus at Alexandria.<note place="foot">Überweg, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> i. p. 232;
Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2, p. 83;
Thiersch, <hi rend="italic">Politik u. Phil.</hi> etc., pp. 15, 16.</note> In that
meeting-point of the East and West, of all systems of thought
and worship, syncretism blended all faiths. Hadrian, in his
letter to Servianus, cynically observes that the same men were
ready to worship impartially Serapis or Christ.<note place="foot">Flav. Vop. <hi rend="italic">Vit.
    <anchor id="corr397"/><corr sic="Saturn,">Saturn.</corr></hi> c. 8, § 2,
illic qui Serapem colunt Christiani
sunt, et devoti sunt Serapi, qui se
Christi episcopos dicunt, etc.</note> Philosophy
became more and more a religion; its first and highest aim
is a right knowledge of God. And philosophy, having failed
to find help in the life according to nature, or the divine
element in individual consciousness, had now to seek support
in a God transcending nature and consciousness, a God such as
the mysticism of the East or the systems of Pythagoras and
Plato had foreshadowed. But such a God, transcending nature
and consciousness, remote, ineffable, only, in some rare moment
of supreme exaltation, dimly apprehensible by the human
spirit,<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiv. 8,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἦ γὰρ ἂν τῷ διὰ μέσου πολλῷ τὸ θνητὸν πρὸς τὸ ἀθάνατον
    διετειχίσθη τῆς οὐρανίου ἐπόψεώς τε καὶ ὁμιλίας ὅτι
    μὴ τῆς δαιμονίου ταύτης φύσεως, κτλ.</foreign> Cf. xvi. 9.</note> could not call forth fully the loving trust and fervent
reverence which men longed to offer. Heaven being so far from
earth, and earth so darkened by the mists of sense, any gleam
of revelation must be welcomed from whatever quarter it
might break. And thus an all-embracing syncretism, while it
gratified ancestral piety, and the natural instinct of all religion
to root itself in the past, offered the hope of illumination from
converging lights. Or rather, any religion which has won the
reverence of men may transmit a ray from the central Sun.
The believer in God, who longs for communion with Him, for
help at His hands, might by reverent selection win from all
religions something to satisfy his needs. A revelation was the
imperious demand. Where should men be so likely to find it
as in the reverent study of great historic efforts of humanity
to pierce the veil?
</p>

<pb n="398"/><anchor id="Pg398"/>

<p>
The philosophy which was to attempt the revival of
paganism in the second century, and which was to fight its
last battles in the fourth and fifth, traced itself to Pythagoras
and Plato. Plato’s affinity with the older mystic is well known.
And the reader of the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> or the <hi rend="italic">Republic</hi> will not be surprised
to find the followers of the two masters of Greek thought
who believed most in a spiritual vision and in an ordered
moral life, united in an effort which extended to the close of the
Western Empire,<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 8; ii. 17.</note> to combine a lofty mysticism with ancestral
faith. The two systems had much in common, and yet each
contributed a peculiar element to the great movement. Pythagoreanism,
although its origin is veiled in mystery, was always
full of the mysticism of the East. Platonism was essentially
the philosophy of Greek culture. The movement in which
their forces were combined was one in which the new Hellenism of
Hadrian’s reign reinforced itself for the reconstruction of western
paganism with those purer and loftier ideas of God of which the
East is the original home. The effort of paganism to rehabilitate
itself in the second century drew no small part of its inspiration
from the regions which were the cradle of the Christian faith.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2, pp. 57-62.</note>
</p>

<p>
Seneca seems to regard Pythagoreanism as extinct.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Nat. Q.</hi> vii. 32, 2, Pythagorica
illa invidiosa turbae schola praeceptorem
non invenit.</note> Yet
one of his own teachers, Sotion, practised its asceticism,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 49, § 2; 108, § 17.</note>
and in the first century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, the traces of at least ninety
treatises by members of the school have been recovered by
antiquarian care, many of them forgeries foisted on ancient
names.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 2, p. 85.</note> As a didactic system, indeed, the school had long
disappeared, but the Pythagorean <hi rend="italic">askesis</hi> seems never to have
lost its continuity. It drew down the ridicule of the New
Comedy. It may have had a share in forming the Essene
and Therapeutic discipline.<note place="foot">Überweg, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> i. p. 228; cf.
Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hibbert Lec.</hi> p. 148.</note> In the first century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> it had a
distinguished adherent in P. Nigidius Figulus, and a learned
expositor in Alexander Polyhistor. Its enduring power as a
spiritual creed congenial to paganism is shown by the fact that
Iamblichus, one of the latest Neo-Platonists, and one of the
ardent devotees of superstition, expounded the Pythagorean
system in many treatises and composed an imaginative biography
<pb n="399"/><anchor id="Pg399"/>of the great founder.<note place="foot">Überweg, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> i. p. 252; cf.
Eunapius, <hi rend="italic">Vit. Iambl.</hi></note> To the modern it is best known
through the romantic life of Apollonius of Tyana, by Philostratus,
which was composed at the instance of Julia Domna,
the wife of Septimius Severus, who combined with a doubtful
virtue a love for the mysticism of her native East.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 3, 1; cf.
Ael. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Sev.</hi> 18.</note> Apollonius
is surrounded by his biographer with an atmosphere of mystery
and miracle. But although the critical historian must reject
much of the narrative, the faith of the Pythagorean missionary
of the reign of Domitian stands out in clear outline.
Apollonius is a true representative of the new spiritual
movement. His mother had a vision before his birth. His
early training at Aegae was eclectic, like the spirit of the age,
and he heard the teaching of doctors of all the schools, not
even excluding the Epicurean.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 7.</note> But he early devoted himself
to the severe asceticism of the Pythagorean sect, wore pure
linen, abstained from wine and flesh, observed the five years
of silence, and made the temple his home. The worship of
Asclepius, which was then gaining an extraordinary vogue, had
a special attraction for him, with its atmosphere of serenity
and ritual purity and its dream oracles of beneficent healing.
Apollonius combines in a strange fashion, like Plutarch and
the eclectic Platonists, a decided monotheism with a conservative
devotion to the ancient gods. He looks to the East, to
the sages of the Ganges, for the highest inspiration. He
worships the sun every day.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 38.</note> Yet he has a profound interest
in the popular religion of the many lands through which he
travelled. He frequented the temples of all the gods, discoursed
with the priests on the ancient lore of their shrines,
and corrected or restored, with an authority which seems to
have never been challenged, their ritual where it had been
forgotten or mutilated in the lapse of ages.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 11, § 16; i. 31; iv. 19, 20;
iv. 41.</note> He sought initiation
in all the mysteries. He wrote a book on Sacrifices which
dealt with the most minute details of worship.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 41.</note> He had a
profound interest in ancient legend, and the fame of the great
Hellenic heroes, and, having spent a weird night with the
shade of Achilles in the Troad, he constrained the Thessalians
<pb n="400"/><anchor id="Pg400"/>to restore his fallen honours.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 13; iv.
16.</note> The temples recognised in him
at once a champion and a reformer. The oracular seats of
Ionia showed an unenvious admiration of his gift of prophecy,
and hailed him as a true son of Apollo.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 1,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">λόγοι τε περὶ αὐτοῦ ἐφοίτων οἱ μὲν ἐκ τοῦ Κολοφῶνι
μαντείου κοινωνὸν τῆς ἑαυτοῦ σοφίας καὶ ἀτεχνῶς
σοφὸν τὸν ἄνδρα ᾄδοντες, οἱ δὲ ἐκ Διδύμων</foreign>.</note> His visit to Rome
in the darkest hour of the Neronian terror seems to have
aroused a strange religious fervour; the temples were thronged
with worshippers; it was a heathen revival.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 41.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet this strange missionary held principles which ought to
have been fatal to heathen worship. He drew his central
principle from Eastern pantheism, which might seem irreconcilable
with the anthropomorphism of the West. It is true
that under the Infinite Spirit, as in the Platonist théodicée, the
gods of heathen devotion find a place as His ministers and
viceroys.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 35,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὴν δὲ (ἔδραν ἀποδοτέον) ἐπ’ ἐκείνῃ θεοῖς,
    οἱ τὰ μέρη αὐτοῦ κυβερνῶσι</foreign>:
cf. Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiv. § 6 sqq.</note> But the eternal antithesis of spirit and matter, and
the contempt for the body as a degrading prison of the divine
element in man,<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> ii. 37; vi.
11; vii. 26; Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiii. § 5.</note> the ascetic theory that by crucifying the
flesh and attenuating its powers, the spirit might lay itself open
to heavenly influences, these are doctrines which might appear
utterly hostile to a gross materialist ritual. And as a matter
of fact, Apollonius to some extent obeyed his principles. He
scorned the popular conception of divination and magic.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> vi. 10; iv.
40; v. 12; iv. 18; iv. 44.</note> The
only legitimate power of foreseeing the future or influencing
the material world is given to the soul which is pure from all
fleshly taint and therefore near to God. He feels profoundly
that the myths propagated by the poets have lowered the ideal
of God and the character of man, and he greatly prefers the
fables of Aesop, which use the falsehoods of the fancy for a
definite moral end.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 13; iii. 25.</note> The mutilation of a father, the storming
of Olympus by the Giants, incest and adultery among the gods,
must be reprobated, however they have been glorified by poetry.
Apollonius poured contempt on the animal worship of Egypt,
even when defended by the dialectic subtlety of Greece.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 19.</note> He
was repelled by the grossness of bloody sacrifices, however consecrated
by immemorial use. For the nobler symbolism of
<pb n="401"/><anchor id="Pg401"/>Hellenic art he had a certain sympathy, like Dion, but only as
symbolism. Any sensible image of the Supreme, which does
not carry the soul beyond the bounds of sense, defeats its
purpose and is degrading to pure religion. Pictured or
sculptured forms are only aids to that mystic imagination
through which alone we can see God. Finally, his idea of
prayer is intensely spiritual or ethical. <q>Grant me, ye gods,
what is my due</q> is the highest prayer of Apollonius.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 40.</note> Yet, as
we have already seen, the religion of Apollonius is thoroughly
practical. He was a great preacher. He addressed vast
crowds from the temple steps at Ephesus or Olympia, rebuking
their luxury and effeminacy, their feuds and mean civic ambition,
their love of frivolous sports or the bloody strife of the arena.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 22; iv. 41; v. 26.</note>
Next to the knowledge of God, he preached the importance of
self-knowledge, and of lending an attentive ear to the voice of
conscience. He crowned his life by asserting fearlessly the cause
of righteousness in the awful presence-chamber of Domitian.
</p>

<p>
About the very time when Apollonius was bearding the last
of the Flavians, and preaching a pagan revival in the porticoes
of the Roman temples, it is probable that Plutarch, in some
respects a kindred spirit, was making his appearance as a lecturer
at Rome.<note place="foot">Gréard, <hi rend="italic">De la Morale de Plutarch</hi>,
p. 32; Volkmann, <hi rend="italic">Leben</hi>, etc. p. 37.</note> The greatest of biographers has had no authentic
biography himself.<note place="foot">For the apocryphal accounts, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Gréard, p. 3 sqq.</note> The few certain facts about his life must
be gleaned from his own writings. He was the descendant of
an ancient family of Chaeronea, famous as the scene of three
historic battles, <q>the War-God’s dancing-place,</q> and his great-grandfather
had tales of the great conflict at Actium.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Vit. Anton.</hi> c. 68,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὁ γοῦν πρόπαππος ἡμῶν Νίκαρχος διηγεῖτο κτλ.</foreign>: Volkmann,
p. 21.</note> In the
year 66 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, when Nero was distinguishing or disgracing himself
as a competitor at the Greek festivals, Plutarch was a
young student at the university of Athens, under Ammonius,<note place="foot">Plut.
    <hi rend="italic">De <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ΕΙ</foreign> ap. Delph.</hi> c. 1; cf. 17;
<hi rend="italic">Vit. Themist.</hi> c. 32; <hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> iii. 1,
§ 1; ix. 14, § 2; ix. 14, § 7; i. 9;
Eunap. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph. Prooem.</hi> 5,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐν οἷς Ἀμμώνιός τε ἦν Πλουτάρχου τοῦ θειοτάτου γεγονὼς διδάσκαλος</foreign>.</note>
who, if he inspired him with admiration for Plato, also taught
him to draw freely from all the treasures of Greek thought.
Plutarch, before he finally settled down at Chaeronea, saw
something of the great Roman world. He had visited
Alex<pb n="402"/><anchor id="Pg402"/>andria and some part of Asia Minor.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> v. 5, § 1, <hi rend="italic">Vit. Agesil.</hi> c.
19; Volkmann, pp. 34, 63.</note> He was at an early age
employed to represent his native town on public business,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Praec. Ger. Reipub.</hi> c. 20.</note> and
he had thus visited Rome, probably in the reign of Vespasian,
and again, in the reign of
Domitian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> viii. 7, § 1,
    <hi rend="italic">Vit. Dem.</hi> c.
2. In this passage he says,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐ σχολῆς οὔσης γυμάζεσθαι περὶ τὴν Ῥωμαικὴν διάλεκτον ὑπὸ χρειῶν πολιτικῶν ...
ὀψέ ποτε καὶ πόρρω τῆς ἡλικίας ἠρξάμεθα Ῥωμαικοῖς γράμμασιν ἐντυγχάνειν</foreign>. Cf.
<hi rend="italic">Frat. Am.</hi> 4.</note> It was a time when
original genius in Roman literature was showing signs of failure,
but when minute antiquarian learning was becoming a passion.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> c. xx.; Spart. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Hadr.</hi>
c. 16, § 5, Aul. Gell. xii. 2; Luc.
<hi rend="italic">Lexiph.</hi> c. 20; Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii.
p. 278; Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 96; Gréard,
<hi rend="italic">Morale de Plut.</hi> p. 33; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
114, § 13, multi ex alieno seculo petunt
verba: duodecim tabulas loquuntur.</note>
It was also the age of the new sophist. Hellenism was in the air,
and the lecture theatres were thronged to hear the philosophic
orator or the professional artist in words.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p. 360.</note> Although Plutarch is
never mentioned beside men like Euphrates, in Pliny’s letters,
he found an audience at Rome, and the famous Arulenus Rusticus
was once among his hearers.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Curios.</hi> c. 15,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐμοῦ ποτε ἐν Ῥώμῃ διαλεγομένου Ῥούστικος ἐκεῖνος ὃν
ἀπέκτεινε Δομιτιανὸς ... ἠκροᾶτο κτλ.</foreign></note> While he was ransacking the
imperial libraries, he also formed the acquaintance, at pleasant
social parties, of many men of academic and official fame, some
of whom belonged to the circle of Pliny and Tacitus.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. 1;
    <hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> i.
9; v. 7, § 10; viii. 1; <hi rend="italic">De Cohib. Ira</hi>,
c. 1; <hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> ii. 3; i. 5; cf. Plin.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 9; iv. 5; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> i. 13; iv. 4;
Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agr.</hi> c. 2; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> c. xxii.</note>
</p>

<p>
But his native Greece, with its great memories, and his
native Chaeronea, to which he was linked by ancestral piety,
had for a man like Plutarch far stronger charms than the
capital of the world. With our love of excitement and
personal prominence, it is hard to conceive how a man of
immense culture and brilliant literary power could endure the
monotony of bourgeois society in depopulated and decaying
Greece.<note place="foot">For a description of this society,
see Mahaffy’s <hi rend="italic">Greek World under Rom.
Sway</hi>, c. xliv.</note> Yet Plutarch seems to have found it easy, and even
pleasant. He was too great to allow his own scheme of life
to be crossed and disturbed by vulgar opinion or ephemeral
ambition. His family relations were sweet and happy. His
married life realised the highest ideals of happy wedlock.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Ux.</hi> c. iv. x.;
<hi rend="italic">Conj. Praec.</hi> c. xliv.</note> He
had the respectful affection of his brothers and older kinsmen.
The petty magistracies, in which he made it a duty to serve
<pb n="403"/><anchor id="Pg403"/>his native town, were dignified in his eyes by the thought
that Epameinondas had once been charged with the cleansing of
the streets of Thebes.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Praec. Ger. Reipub.</hi> c. 15;
cf. <hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> vi. 8, § 1.</note> His priesthood of Apollo at Delphi
was probably far more attractive than the imperial honours
which, according to legend, were offered to him by Trajan and
Hadrian.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">An Seni Sit Ger. Resp.</hi> c. 17,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἶσθά με τῷ Πυθίῳ λειτουργοῦντα πολλὰς πυθιάδας</foreign>.
    Suidas, <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Πλούταρχος</foreign>: cf.
Volkmann, p. 91.</note> To his historic and religious imagination the
ancient shrine which looked down on the gulf from the foot
of the <q>Shining Rocks,</q> was sacred as no other spot on earth.
Although in Plutarch’s day Delphi had declined in splendour
and fame,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Orac.</hi> c. v. viii.</note> it was still surrounded with the glamour of
immemorial sanctity and power. It was still the spot from
which divine voices of warning or counsel had issued to the
kings of Lydia, to chiefs of wild hordes upon the Strymon,
to the envoys of the Roman Tarquins, to every city of
Hellenic name from the Euxine to the Atlantic. We can
still almost make the round of its antiquarian treasures under
his genial guidance. Probably Plutarch’s happiest hours were
spent in accompanying a party of visitors,—a professor on his
way home from Britain to Tarsus, a Spartan traveller just returned
from far Indian seas,—around those sacred scenes; we
can hear the debate on the doubtful quality of Delphic verse or
the sources of its inspiration: we can watch them pause to
recall the story of mouldering bronze or marble, and wake the
echoes of a thousand years.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. ii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch must have been a swift and indefatigable worker,
for his production is almost on the scale of Varro, Cicero, or
the elder Pliny. Yet he found time for pleasant visits to
every part of Greece which had tales or treasures for the
antiquary. He enjoyed the friendship of the brightest intellects
of the day, of Herodes Atticus, the millionaire rhetorician,<note place="foot">Trench, <hi rend="italic">Plutarch</hi>, p. 22; Volkmann,
p. 58.</note>
of Favorinus, the great sophist of Gaul, the intimate friend
of Herodes and the counsellor of the Emperor Hadrian, of
Ammonius, who was Plutarch’s tutor; of many others, noted
in their time, but who are mere shadows to us. They met
in a convivial way in many places, at Chaeronea, at Hyampolis,
at Eleusis after the Mysteries, at Patrae, at Corinth during
<pb n="404"/><anchor id="Pg404"/>the Isthmian games, at Thermopylae, and Athens in the
house of Ammonius, or at Aedepsus, the Baden of Euboea,
where in the springtime people found pleasant lodgings and
brisk intercourse to relieve the monotony of attendance at the
baths.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> ii. 2, § 1 (Eleusis);
v. 8, § 1 (Athens); i. 10, § 1; ii. 1,
§ 1 (Patrae); iii. 1, § 1; iv. 4, § 1
(Aedepsus),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">χωρίον κατεσκευασμένον οἰκήσεσι ... μάλιστα δ’ ἀνθεῖ τὸ χωρίον
ἀκμάζοντος ἔαρος. πολλοὶ γὰρ άφικνοῦνται τὴν ὥραν αὐτόθι,
καὶ συνουσίας ποιοῦνται μετ’ ἀλλήλων ἐν ἀφθόνοις πᾶσι,
καὶ πλείστας περὶ λόγους ὑπὸ σχολῆς διατριβὰς ἔχουσι</foreign>: cf. Volkmann,
p. 57.</note> Plutarch had a large circle of relatives,—his grandfather
Lamprias, who had tales from an actual witness of the revels
of Antony at Alexandria;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Vit. Anton.</hi> c. 28,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διηγεῖτο γοῦν ἡμῶν τῷ πάππῳ Λαμπρίᾳ Φιλώτας
ὁ Ἀμφισσεὺς ἰατρὸς εἶναι μὲν ἐν Ἀλεξανδρεῖᾳ τότε μανθάνων τὴν τέχνην, κτλ.</foreign></note> Lamprias his elder brother, a true
Boeotian in his love of good fare, a war-dance, and a jest;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> ii. 2, § 1; ix. 15, § 1;
viii. 6, § 5.</note> his
younger brother Timon, to whom Plutarch was devotedly
attached.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Fr. Am.</hi> c. 16.</note> His ordinary society, not very distinguished
socially, was composed of grammarians, rhetoricians, country
doctors, the best that the district could afford.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> iv. 1, 1; iv. 4, 1; v. 10,
1; v. 5, 1.</note> The talk is
often on the most trivial or absurd subjects, though not more
absurdly trivial than those on which the polished sophist displayed
his graces in the lecture-hall.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ix. 4, § 1; Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">Greek
World</hi>, <hi rend="italic">etc.</hi> p. 338.</note> Yet graver and more
serious themes are not excluded,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> viii. 2; viii. 7.</note> and the table-talk of Greece
in the end of the first century is invaluable to the student of
society. In such scenes Plutarch not only cultivated friendship,
the great art of life, not only watched the play of intellect
and character; he also found relief from the austere labours
which have made his fame. It is surely not the least of his
titles to greatness that, in an environment which to most men
of talent would have been infinitely depressing, with the
irrepressible vitality of genius he contrived to idealise the
society of decaying Greece by linking it with the past.
</p>

<p>
And, with such a power of reviving the past, even the
dulness of the little Boeotian town was easily tolerable. We
can imagine Plutarch looking down the quiet street in the
still vacant noontide, as he sat trying to revive the ancient
glories of his race, and to match them with their conquerors,
while he reminded the lords of the world, who, in Plutarch’s
<pb n="405"/><anchor id="Pg405"/>early youth, seemed to be wildly squandering their heritage, of
the stern, simple virtue by which it had been won. For in the
Lives of great Greeks and Romans, the moral interest is the
most prominent. It is biography, not history, which Plutarch
is writing.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Vit. Alex.</hi> c. 1,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὔτε γὰρ ἱστορίας γράφομεν ἀλλὰ βίους οὔτε ταῖς ἐπιφανεστάταις
    πράξεσι πάντως ἔνεστι δήλωσις ἀρετῆς ἢ κακίας</foreign>.
    So <hi rend="italic">Vit. Nic.</hi> c. 1,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐ τὴν ἄχρηστον ἀθροίζων ἱστορίαν ἀλλὰ τὴν πρὸς κατανόησιν
ἤθους καὶ τρόπου παραδιδούς</foreign><anchor id="corr405"/><corr sic="missing">.</corr></note> Setting and scenery of course there must be; but
Plutarch’s chief object is to paint the character of the great
actors on the stage. Hence he may slur over or omit historic
facts of wider interest, while he records apparently trivial
incidents or sayings which light up a character. But Plutarch
has a fine eye both for lively social scenes and the great
crises of history. The description of the feverish activity of
swarming industry in the great days of Pheidias at Athens, once
read, can never be forgotten.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Vit. Pericl.</hi> c. 12.</note> Equally indelible are the pictures
of the younger Cato’s last morning, as he finished the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi>,
and the birds began to twitter,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Vit. Cat. Min.</hi> c. 70.</note> of the flight and murder of
Pompey, of the suicide of Otho on the ghastly field of Bedriacum,
which seemed to atone for an evil life. Nor can we
forget his description of one of the saddest of all scenes in Greek
history, which moved even Thucydides to a restrained pathos,—the
retreat of the Athenians from the walls of Syracuse.
</p>

<p>
Plutarch was before all else a moralist, with a genius for
religion. His ethical treatises deserve to be thoroughly explored,
and as sympathetically expounded, for the light which they
throw on the moral aspirations of the age, as Dr. Mahaffy has
skilfully used them for pictures of its social life. He must
be a very unimaginative person who cannot feel the charm of
their revelation. But the man of purely speculative interest
will probably be disappointed. Plutarch is not an original
thinker in morals or religion. He has no new gospel to expound.
He does not go to the roots of conduct or faith. Possessing
a very wide knowledge of past speculation, he might have
written an invaluable history of ancient philosophy. But he
has not done it. And, as a man of genius, with a strong
practical purpose to do moral good to his fellows, his choice of
his vocation must be accepted without cavil. He was the
greatest Hellenist of his day, when Hellenism was capturing
<pb n="406"/><anchor id="Pg406"/>the Roman world. He was also a man of high moral ideals,
sincere piety, and absorbing interest in the fate of human
character. With all that wealth of learning, philosophic or
historical, with all that knowledge of human nature, what
nobler task could a man set himself than to attempt to give
some practical guidance to a generation conscious of moral
weakness, and distracted between new spiritual ideals and the
mythologies of the past? The urgent need for moral culture and
reform of character, for a guiding force in conduct, was profoundly
felt by all the great serious minds of the Flavian age, by
Pliny and Tacitus, by Juvenal and Quintilian. But Plutarch
probably felt it more acutely than any, and took endless pains
to satisfy it. It was an age when the philosophic director and
the philosophic preacher were, as we have seen, to be met with
everywhere. And Plutarch took his full share in the movement,
and influenced a wide circle.<note place="foot">Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Morale de Plut.</hi> pp. 36,
52, 67.</note> If he did not elaborate an
original ethical system, he had studied closely the art of
moral reform, and Christian homilists, from Basil to Jeremy
Taylor, have drawn freely from the storehouse of his precept
and observation. In many tracts he has analysed prevailing
vices and faults of his time,—flattery, vain curiosity, irritable
temper, or false modesty,—and given rules for curing or avoiding
them. In these homilies, the fundamental principle is that of
Musonius, perhaps adapted from an oracle to the people of
Cirrha <q>to wage war with vice day and night, and never to
relax your guard.</q><note place="foot">Cf. A. Gell. xviii. 2.</note> The call to reform sounded all the louder
in Plutarch’s ears because of the high ideal which he had conceived
of what life might be made if, no longer left to the play of
passion and random influences, character were moulded from
early youth to a temperate harmony. To such a soul each
passing day might be a glad festival, the universe an august
temple full of its Maker’s glories, and life an initiation into the
joy of its holy mysteries.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. xx.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀνὴρ δὲ ἀγαθὸς οὐ πᾶσαν ἡμέραν ἑορτὴν ἡγεῖται; κτλ.</foreign> 
</note>
</p>

<p>
In the work of moral and religious reconstruction Plutarch
and his contemporaries could only rely on philosophy as their
guide. Philosophy to Plutarch, Apollonius, or M. Aurelius,
had a very different meaning from what it bore to the great
<pb n="407"/><anchor id="Pg407"/>thinkers of Ionia and Magna Graecia. Not only had it
deserted the field of metaphysical speculation; it had lost
interest even in the mere theory of morals. It had become
the art rather than the science of life. The teacher of an art
cannot indeed entirely divorce it from all scientific theory.
The relative importance of practical precept and ethical theory
was often debated in that age. But the tendency was
undoubtedly to subordinate dogma to edification.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 88, ad virtutem nihil
conferunt liberalia studia; cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 94,
95, § 41.</note> And where
dogma was needed for practical effect, it might be drawn from
the most opposite quarters. Seneca delights in rounding off a
letter by a quotation from Epicurus. M. Aurelius appeals
both to the example of Epicurus and the teaching of Plato.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vii. 35; ix. 41; Epict.
<hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> lii.</note>
Man might toy with cosmic speculation; the Timaeus had
many commentators in the first and second centuries.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Gr.</hi> iii. 1, p. 720 n.</note> But,
for Plutarch and his contemporaries, the great task of philosophy
was to bring some sort of order into the moral and
religious chaos. It was not original thought or discovery
which was needed, but the application of reason, cultivated by
the study of the past, to the moral and religious problems of
the present. The philosopher sometimes, to our eyes, seems to
trifle with the smallest details of exterior deportment or idiom
or dress; he gives precepts about the rearing of children; he
occupies himself with curious questions of ritual and antiquarian
interest.<note place="foot">A. Gell. i. 10; ii. 26; vii. 13; xii.
1; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 20; v.
16.</note> These seeming degradations of a great mission, after
all, only emphasise the fact that philosophy was now concerned
with human life rather than with the problems of speculation.
It had in fact become an all-embracing religion. It supplied the
medicine for moral disease; it furnished the rational criterion
by which all myth and ritual must be judged or explained.<note place="foot">Oakesmith,
    <hi rend="italic">Rel. of Plutarch</hi>, p. <anchor id="corr407"/><corr sic="64">64.</corr></note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch was an eclectic in the sense that, knowing all the
moral systems of the past, he was ready to borrow from any
of these principles which might give support to character.
Whether, if he had been born four or five hundred years
earlier, he might have created or developed an original theory
himself, is a question which may be variously answered. One
may reasonably hesitate to assent to the common opinion that
<pb n="408"/><anchor id="Pg408"/>Plutarch had no genius for original speculation. Had he come
under the influence of Socrates, it is not so certain that he
might not have composed dialogues with a certain charm of
fresh dialectic and picturesque dramatic power. It is a little
unhistorical to decry a man of genius as wanting in speculative
originality, who was born into an age when speculation had run
dry, and thought was only subsidiary to conduct. When the
dissonant schools forsook the heights of metaphysic and cosmology
to devote themselves to moral culture, an inevitable tendency
to eclecticism, to a harmony of moral theory, set in. The
practical interest prevailed over the infinitely divisive forces
of the speculative reason. Antiochus, the teacher of Cicero,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cic.</hi> c. 4.</note>
while he strove to re-establish Platonism, maintained the
essential agreement of the great schools on the all-important
questions, and freely adopted the doctrines of Zeno and
Aristotle.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Gr.</hi> iii. 1, p. 534,
in der Hauptsache die bedeutendsten
Philosophenschulen übereinstimmen,
etc.</note> Panaetius, the chief representative of Roman
Stoicism in the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, had a warm admiration
for Plato and Aristotle, and in some essential points forsook
the older teaching of the Porch.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 503.</note> Seneca, as we have seen,
often seems to cling to the most hard and repellent tenets of
the ancient creed. Yet a sense of practical difficulties has led
him to soften and modify many of them—the identity of
reason and passion, the indifference of so-called <q>goods,</q> the
necessity of instantaneous conversion, the unapproachable and
unassailable perfection of the wise man. Plutarch’s own
ethical system, so far as he has a system, is a compound of
Platonic and Aristotelian ideas, with a certain tincture of
Stoicism.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 2, pp. 144, 145.</note> Platonism, which had shaken off its sceptical
tendencies in the first century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, had few adherents at
Rome in the first century of the Empire.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Nat. Qu.</hi> vii. 32, 2; Academici
et veteres et minores nullum antistitem
reliquerunt.</note> The Stoic and
Epicurean systems divided the allegiance of thinking people
till the energetic revival of Hellenism set in. Epictetus
indeed speaks of women who were attracted by the supposed
freedom of sexual relations in Plato’s Utopia.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> liii.</note> Seneca often
refers to Plato, and was undoubtedly influenced by his spirit.
<pb n="409"/><anchor id="Pg409"/>But in the second century, the sympathetic union of Platonic
and Pythagorean ideas with a vigorous religious revival became
a real power, with momentous effects on the future of
philosophy and religion for three centuries. Plutarch’s reverence
for the founder of the Academy, even in little things, was
unbounded.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> vii. 1; <hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi>
xxxvi.</note> It became with him almost a kind of cult. And
he paid the most sincere reverence to his idol by imitating, in
some of his treatises, the mythical colouring by which the
author of the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> and the <hi rend="italic">Republic</hi> had sought to give body
and reality to the unseen world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">e.g.</hi>
    <hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> xxii. sqq.; <hi rend="italic">De
Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> xxii.</note> Plutarch condemned in very
strong language the coarse and sophistical modes of controversy
with which the rival schools assailed one another’s tenets.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Non posse Suav. vivi sec. Epic.</hi> c.
ii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὰ γὰρ αἴσχιστα ῥήματα, βωμολοχίας, ληκυθισμούς, ἀλαζονείας,
ἡεταιρήσεις, ἀνδροφονίας ... συνάγοντες Ἀριστοτέλους
καὶ Σωκράτους καὶ Πυθαγόρου καὶ τίνος γὰρ οὐχὶ τῶν ἐπιφανῶν,
κατεσκέδασαν</foreign>:
<hi rend="italic">Adv. Col.</hi> c. ii.</note>
Yet he can hardly be acquitted of some harshness in his
polemic against the Stoics and Epicureans. Archbishop Trench,
in his fascinating and sympathetic treatment of Plutarch,
laments that he did not give a more generous recognition to
that noblest and most truly Roman school which was the last
refuge and citadel of freedom.<note place="foot">Trench, <hi rend="italic">Plut.</hi> p. 93.</note> We may join the archbishop
in wishing that Plutarch, without compromising principle, had
been more tolerant to a system with which he had so much in
common, and which, in his day, had put off much of its old
hardness. But he was essentially a practical man, with a
definite moral aim. He took from any quarter principles
which seemed to him to be true to human nature, and which
furnished a hopeful basis for the efforts of the moral teacher.
But he felt equally bound to reject a system which absorbed
and annihilated the emotional nature in the reason,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Virt. Mor.</hi> c. vii. sqq.</note> which cut
at the roots of moral freedom, which recognised no degrees in
virtue or in vice, which discouraged and contemned the first
faint struggles of weak humanity after a higher life, and froze
it into hopeless impotence by the remote ideal of a cold, flawless
perfection, suddenly and miraculously raised to a divine
independence of all the minor blessings and helps to virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Adv. Stoicos</hi>, c. x.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλὰ ὥσπερ ὁ πηχύν ἀπέχων ἐν θαλάσσῃ ἐπιφανείας
οὐδὲν ἥττον πνίγεται τοῦ καταδεδυκότος ὀργυιὰς πεντακοσίας, κτλ.</foreign>
Cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi>
66, § 10; Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der. Griech.</hi> iii.
1, p. 230.</note>
<pb n="410"/><anchor id="Pg410"/>Such an ideal may be magnificent, but it is not life. For man,
constituted as he is, and placed in such an environment, it is
a dangerous mental habit to train the soul to regard all things
as a fleeting and monotonous show, to cultivate the <hi rend="italic">taedium
vitae</hi>, or a calm resignation to the littleness of man placed for
a brief space between the two eternities.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. ix. 32; xii. 32; ix. 14;
xi. 1; vii. 1; vi. 46; ix. 14.</note> The philosophic
sufferer may brace himself to endure the round of human
duties, and to live for the commonwealth of man; he may he
generous to the ungrateful and tolerant to the vulgar and the
frivolous; he may make his life a perpetual sacrifice to duty
and the higher law, but it is all the while really a pathetic
protest against the pitiless Power which has made man so little
and so great, doomed to the life of the leaves and the insects,
yet tortured with the longing for an infinite future.
</p>

<p>
On some great central truths, such as the inwardness of
happiness and the brotherhood of man, Plutarch and the Stoics
were at one. And the general tone of his moral teaching
bears many marks of Stoic influence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. iii., iv., xiv., xvii.;
<hi rend="italic">De Cup. Div.</hi> iii., iv.; <hi rend="italic">De Exil.</hi> v.; <hi rend="italic">De
Alex. Virt.</hi> c. vi.; ad init.; Zeller, iii.
1. p. 281.</note> But the Stoic psychology,
the Stoic fatalism and pantheism aroused all the controversial
vehemence of Plutarch.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Gr.</hi> iii. 1, p. 208;
cf. iii. 2, p. 163; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Virt. Mor.</hi> c.
viii.</note> The Stoic held the essential unity
of the soul, that reason and passion are not two distinct
principles, but that passion is reason depraved and diverted to
wrong objects. It is the same simple, indivisible power which
shifts and changes and submits itself to opposing influences.
Passion, in fact, is an impetuous and erring motion of the
reason, and vice, in the old Socratic phrase, is an error of judgment,
a fit of ignorance of the true ends of action. But as,
according to Stoic theory, the human reason is a portion of
the Divine, depravity becomes thus a corruption of the Divine
element, and the guarantee for any hope of reform is lost.
For himself, Plutarch adopts the Platonic division of the soul
into the rational, spirited, and concupiscent elements, with some
Aristotelian modifications.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Virt. Mor.</hi> l.c.</note> The great fact of man’s moral
nature is the natural opposition between the passions and the
rational element of the soul; it corresponds to a similar
division in the mundane soul.<note place="foot">Zeller. iii. 2, p. 154.</note> All experience attests a
    con<pb n="411"/><anchor id="Pg411"/>stant, natural, and sustained rebellion of the lower against the
higher. Principles so alien and disparate cannot be identified,
any more than you can identify the hunter and his quarry.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Virt. Mor.</hi> vii.</note>
But, although in the unregulated character, they are in violent
opposition, they may, by proper culture, be brought at last
into a harmony. The function of the higher element is not
to extinguish the lower, but to guide and control and elevate
it.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. sq.; <hi rend="italic">De Cur.</hi> i.</note> Passion is a force which may be wasted in vagrant, wild
excess, but which may also be used to give force and energy
to virtue. To avoid drunkenness, a man need not spill the
wine; he may temper its strength. A controlled anger is
the spur of courage. Passion in effect is the raw material
which is moulded by reason into the forms of practical virtue,
and the guiding principle in the process is the law of the
mean between excess and defect of passion.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Virt. Mor.</hi> vi.; Gréard, p.
78.</note> This is, of
course, borrowed from Aristotle, and along with it the theory of
education by habit, which to Plato had seemed a popular and
inferior conception of the formation of the virtuous character.<note place="foot">Pl. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 82 <hi rend="small">B</hi>; cf. Archer-Hind,
App. i. to <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi></note>
By the strong pressure of an enlightened will, the wild insurgent
forces of the lower nature are brought into conformity to a
higher law. It is a slow, laborious process, demanding infinite
patience, daily and hourly watchfulness, self-examination, frank
confession of faults to some friend or wise director of souls.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Cohib. Ira</hi>, i. ii.; <hi rend="italic">De
Prof. in Virt.</hi> xiii. xi. iii.</note>
It needs the minutest attention to the details of conduct and
circumstance, and a steady front against discouragement from
the backsliding of the wavering will.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prof.</hi> iv.; <hi rend="italic">De Cohib. Ira</hi>, ii.</note> In such a system the
hope of reform lies not in any sudden revolution. Plutarch has
no faith in instant conversion, reversing in a moment the ingrained
tendencies of years, and setting a man on a lofty height
of perfection, with no fear of falling away. That vain dream
of the older Stoicism, which recognised no degrees in virtuous
progress, made virtue an unapproachable ideal, and paralysed
struggling effort. It was not for an age stricken or blest with
a growing sense of moral weakness, and clutching eagerly at
any spiritual stay. Plutarch loves rather to think of character
under the image of a holy and royal building whose
founda<pb n="412"/><anchor id="Pg412"/>tions are laid in gold, and each stone has to be chosen and
carefully fitted to the line of reason.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prof.</hi> xvii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ οἵ γε προκόπτοντες, οἷς ἤδη καθάπερ ἱεροῦ τινος
οἰκοδομήματος καὶ βασιλικοῦ τοῦ βίου κεκρότηται
χρυσέα κρηπὶς οὐδὲν εἰκῆ προσίενται τῶν γινομένων, κτλ.</foreign>
</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch also accepted from the Peripatetic school the
principle, which Seneca was in the end compelled to admit,
that the finest paragon of wisdom and virtue is not quite
self-sufficing, that virtuous activity needs material to work
upon,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Adv. St.</hi> iv. vii.</note> and that the good things of the world, in their proper
place, are as necessary to the moral musician as the flute to
the flute-player. Above all, Plutarch, with such a theory of
character, was bound to assert the cardinal doctrine of human
freedom. He had a profound faith in a threefold Providence,
exercised by the remote Supreme Deity, by the inferior
heavenly powers, and by the daemons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Fato</hi>, c. ix. (572). (Plut.?)</note> But Providence is a
beneficent influence, not a crushing force of necessity. To
Plutarch fatalism is the blight of moral effort. Foreknowledge
and Fate are not conterminous and coextensive. Although
everything is foreseen by heavenly powers, not everything
is foreordained.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. iv. v.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐ πάντα καθαρῶς οὐδὲ διαρρήδην ἡ εἱμαρμένη περιέχει,
ἀλλ’ ὅσα καθόλου</foreign>.</note> The law of Fate, like the laws of
earthly jurisprudence, deals with the universal, and only
consequentially with the particular case. Certain consequences
follow necessarily from certain acts, but the acts are not
inevitably determined.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. iv.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὕτω καὶ ὁ τῆς φύσεως νόμος τὰ μὲν καθόλου συμπεριλαμβάνει
προηγουμένως, τὰ δὲ καθ’ ἕκαστα ἐπομένως</foreign>.</note> Man, by nature the most helpless
and defenceless of animals, becomes lord of creation by
his superior reason, and appropriates all its forces and its
wealth by his laborious arts.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Fort.</hi> c. iii. iv.</note> And the art of arts, the art
of life, neither trusting to chance nor cowed by any fancied
omnipotence of destiny, uses the will and reason to master
the materials out of which happiness is forged. Thus the
hope of a noble life is securely fenced in the fortress of the
autonomous will. To the Stoic the vicious man was a
fool, whose reason was hopelessly besotted. The Platonist
cherished the better hope, that reason, though darkened for a
time and vanquished by the forces of sense, could never
assent to sin, that there still remained in every human
soul a witness to the eternal law of conduct.
</p>

<pb n="413"/><anchor id="Pg413"/>

<p>
With such a faith as this, an earnest man like Plutarch
was bound to become a preacher of righteousness and a
spiritual director. Many of his moral treatises are the
expanded record of private counsel or the more formal
instruction of the lecture-hall. He had disciples all over the
Roman world, at Rome, Chaeronea, Ephesus, and Athens.<note place="foot">Gréard, p. 68 sq.</note> His
conception of the philosophic gathering, in which these
serious things were discussed, is perhaps the nearest approach
which a heathen ever made to the conception of the Christian
church.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Rect. Rat. Aud.</hi> c. vi.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διὸ δεῖ ἀκροάσθαι τοῦ λέγοντος ἴλεων καὶ πρᾷων ὥσπερ ἐφ’ ἑστίασιν
ἱερὰν καὶ θυσίας ἀπαρχὴν παρειλημμένον κτλ.</foreign>: cf.
viii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ εἰς διδασκαλεῖον ἀφῖκται τῷ λόγῳ τὸν βίον ἐπανορθωσόμενος</foreign>: c. xii.</note> In theory, the philosopher’s discourse on high moral
themes was a more solemn affair than the showy declamation
of the sophist, whose chief object was to dazzle and astonish
his audience by a display of rhetorical legerdemain on the
most trivial or out-worn themes. But the moral preacher in
those days, it is to be feared, often forgot the seriousness of
his mission, and degraded it by personal vanity and a tinsel
rhetoric to win a cheap applause.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. vii. viii.; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108,
§ 6, magnam hanc auditorum partem
videbis cui philosophi schola diversorium
otii sit, etc.; Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> ii. 23.</note> The sophist and the
philosopher were in fact too often undistinguishable, and the
philosophic class-room often resounded with new-fangled
expressions of admiration. For all this Plutarch has an
indignant contempt. It is the prostitution of a noble mission.
It is turning the school into a theatre, and the reformer of
souls into a flatterer of the ear. To ask rhetoric from the
true philosopher is as if one should require a medicine
to be served in the finest Attic ware.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Rect. Rat. Aud.</hi> c. ix.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅμοιός ἐστι μὴ βουλομένῳ πιεῖν ἀντίδοτον ἂν μὴ τὸ
ἀγγεῖον ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς κωλιάδος ᾖ κεκεραμευένον</foreign>.</note> The profession of
philosophy becomes in Plutarch’s eyes a real priesthood for
the salvation of souls. He disapproves of the habit, which
prevailed in the sophist’s lecture theatre, of proposing subtle
or frivolous questions to the lecturer in order to make a display
of cleverness. But he would have those in moral difficulty to
remain after the sermon, for such it was, and lay bare their
faults and spiritual troubles.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xii.</note> He watched the moral progress
of his disciples, as when Fundanus is congratulated on his
growing mildness of temper.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Cohib. Ira</hi>, c. i.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ δὲ σφοδρὸν ἐκεῖνο καὶ διάπυρον πρὸς ὀργὴν ὁρῶντί μοι
πρᾷον οὕτω καὶ χειρόηθες τῷ λογισμῷ γεγενημένον ἐπέρχεται
πρὸς τὸν θυμὸν εἰπεῖν κτλ.</foreign>
</note> The philosopher was in those
<pb n="414"/><anchor id="Pg414"/>days, and often too truly, charged with gross inconsistency in his
private conduct. Plutarch believed emphatically in teaching by
example. The preacher of the higher life should inspire such
respect that his frown or smile shall at once affect the disciple.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Rect. Rat. Aud.</hi> c. xii.; cf. <hi rend="italic">De
Prof.</hi> c. xv.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τίθεσθαι πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν τοὺς ὄντας ἀγαθοὺς ἢ γεγενημένους καὶ
    διανοεῖσθαι τί δ’ ἂν ἔπραξεν ἐν τούτῳ Πλάτων κτλ.</foreign></note>
Plutarch evidently practised his remedies on himself. His
great gallery of the heroes of the past was primarily intended
to profit others. But he found, as the work went on, that he
was himself <q>much profited by looking into these histories, as
if he looked into a glass, to frame and fashion his life to the
mould and pattern of these virtuous noblemen.</q><note place="foot">Trench, <hi rend="italic">Plut.</hi> p. 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch, as we have seen, waged determined war with the
older Stoic and Epicurean systems; yet his practical teaching
is coloured by the spirit of both. This is perhaps best seen in
the tract on Tranquillity, which might almost have been written
by Seneca. Although Plutarch elsewhere holds the Peripatetic
doctrine that the full life of virtue cannot dispense with the
external gifts of fortune, he asserts as powerfully as any Stoic
that life takes its predominant colour from the character, that
<q>the kingdom of Heaven is within,</q> that no change of external
fortune can calm the tumults of the soul. You seem to be
listening to a Stoic doctor when you hear that most calamities
draw their weight and bitterness from imagination, that excessive
desire for a thing engenders the fear of losing it, and
makes enjoyment feeble and uncertain, that men, by forgetting
the past in the vanishing present, lose the continuity of their
lives.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. xvi. xvii. xiv. xv.</note> Is it Plutarch himself, or some Christian preacher, who
tells us that seeming calamity may be the greatest blessing,
that the greatest folly is unthankfulness and discontent with
the daily lot, that no wealth or rank can give such enchanted
calm of spirit as a conscience unstained by evil deed or thought,
and the power of facing fortune with steady open eye?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xix.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀγνοουντες ὅσον ἐστὶ πρὸς ἀλυπίαν ἀγαθὸν τὸ μελετᾶν
    καὶ δύνασθαι πρὸς τὴν τύχην ἀνεῳγόσι τοῖς ὄμμασιν ἀντιβλέπειν</foreign>.</note> It is
surely the greatest literary genius of his age, buried in a dull
Boeotian town, who bids us think of the good things we have,
instead of envying a life whose inner griefs we know not, who
ever looks on the brighter side of things and dignifies an obscure
<pb n="415"/><anchor id="Pg415"/>lot by grateful content, who is not vexed by another’s splendid
fortune, because he knows that seeming success is often
a miserable failure, and that each one has within him the
springs of happiness or misery.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Tranq.</hi> c. xi. xiii. xiv.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅτι ἕκαστος ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὰ τῆς εὐθυμίας καὶ τῆς δυσθυμίας
    ἔχει ταμεῖα</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The discipline by which this wise mood, which contains the
wisdom of all the ages, is to be attained is expounded by Plutarch
in many tracts, which are the record of much spiritual counsel.
The great secret is a lover’s passion for the ideal and a scorn for
the vulgar objects of desire.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Prof.</hi> c. xiv.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">δήμωμα δὲ αὐτοῦ πρῶτα μὲν ὁ πρὸς τὰ ἐπαινούμενα ζῆλος
καὶ τὸ ποιεῖν εἴναι προθύμους, ἃ θαυμάζομεν, κτλ.</foreign></note> Yet moral growth must be slow,
though steady and unpausing, not the rush of feverish excitement,
which may be soon spent and exhausted.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. i.-iv.</note> The true
aspirant to moral perfection will not allow himself to be cast
down by the obstacles that meet him at the entrance to the
narrow way, nor will he be beguiled by pomp of style or
subtlety of rhetoric to forget the true inwardness of philosophy.
He will not ask for any witness of his good deeds or his
growth in virtue; he will shrink from the arrogance of the
mere pretender. Rather will he be humble and modest,
harsh to his own faults, gentle to those of others. Like the
neophyte in the mysteries, he will be awed into reverent
silence, when the light bursts from the inner shrine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. x.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὁ δὲ ἐτὸς γενομένος καὶ φῶς μέγα ἰδὼν οἷον ἀνακτόρων
ἀνοιγομένων, ὥσπερ θεῷ τῷ λόγῳ ταπεινὸς συνέπεται κτλ.</foreign></note> This
humility will be cultivated by daily self-scrutiny, and in
this self-examination no sins will seem little, and no addition
to the growing moral wealth, however slight, will be despised.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xvii.</note>
To stimulate effort, we must set the great historic examples of
achievement or self-conquest before our eyes, and in doubt or
difficulty, we must ask what would Plato or Socrates have done
in such a case?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c.
    <anchor id="corr415"/><corr sic="xv;">xv.;</corr> cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 11, § 8;
aliquis vir bonus nobis eligendus est
... ut sic tanquam illo spectante
vivamus, et omnia tanquam illo
vidente faciamus.</note> Where they have suffered, we shall love
and honour them all the more. Their memory will work as a
sacred spell.
</p>

<p>
Plutarch expounded the gospel of a cheerful and contented
life, and he evidently practised what he preached. Yet, like
all finely strung spirits, he had his hours when the pathos of
<pb n="416"/><anchor id="Pg416"/>life was heavy upon him, and death seemed the sovereign
remedy for it all. Any one who shares the vulgar notion
that the Greeks, even of the great age, were a race living in
perpetual sunshine and careless enjoyment of the hour, should
read the Consolation to Apollonius on the death of his son. He
will there find all the great poets, from Homer downwards, cited
in support of the most pessimist view of human life.<note place="foot">Plut. (?) <hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. vi. vii.
sqq.</note> In the field
of philosophy, it finds the most withering expression in the
doctrine of Heraclitus, which did so much to mould the thought
of Plutarch’s great master, and which coloured so many of the
meditations of M. Aurelius.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vii. 1; vii. 19; vi. 15;
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐν δὴ τούτῳ τῷ ποταμῷ τί ἄν τις τούτων παραθεόντων
    ἐκτιμήσειεν ἐφ’ οὗ στῆναι οὐκ ἔξεστιν</foreign>: ix. 32; cf. <hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi>
c. x.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ ᾗ φησιν Ἡράκλειτος, ταὐτό τ’ ἔνι ζῶν καὶ τεθνηκός</foreign>.</note> Our life is but in miniature a
counterpart of the universal flux, and each moment is the meeting
place of life and death. Years, many or few, are but a point,
a moment in the tract of infinite age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. xvii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τό τε πολὺ δήπυθεν ἢ μικρὸν οὐδὲν διαφέρειν δοκεῖ
πρὸς τὸν ἄπειρον ἀφορῶσιν αἰῶνα</foreign>.</note> The noble fulness of a
life must be sought not in a sum of years, but in a rounded
completeness of virtue. When we look at the chance and
change and sorrow of life, death seems really the great deliverer,
and in certain moments, it may be hailed as Heaven’s last, best
gift.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xiv.</note> Whether it be an unawaking sleep or the entrance to
another scene of being, it cannot be an evil; it may perchance
be a blessing. If there is nothing after it, we only return to
our calm antenatal unconsciousness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xv.; cf. Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 99, § 30;
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 36; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 24.</note> Or if there be another
life, then for the good and noble there is a place assuredly
prepared in some happy island of the West, or other mystic
region, which we may picture to ourselves, if we please, in the
Orphic visions glorified by Pindar.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. xxxiv. xxxv.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ χῶρός τις ἀποτεταγμένος ἐν ᾧ διατρίβουσιν αἱ τούτων ψυχαί</foreign>: Pind. <hi rend="italic">Ol.</hi> ii. 106 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are now on the threshold of another world, from which
many voices were coming to the age of Plutarch. After
philosophy has done its utmost to mould the life of sixty or
seventy years into a moral harmony, with its music in itself,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Virt. Mor.</hi> c. vi.</note>
the effort ends in a melancholy doubt. The precept of Seneca
and Plutarch, that you should live under the tutelary eye of
some patron sage of the past, revealed a need of exterior help
<pb n="417"/><anchor id="Pg417"/>for the virtuous will. The passion for continued existence was
sobered by the sense of continued moral responsibility and the
shadow of a judgment to come. Vistas of a supernatural world
opened above the struggling human life on earth and in far
mysterious distances beyond. When philosophy had done its
utmost to heal the diseases of humanity, it was confronted with
another task, to give man a true knowledge of God and assurance
of His help in this world and the next. Philosophy had
for ages held before the eyes of men a dim vision of Him, sublime,
remote, ineffable. But it was a vision for the few, not for the
many. It was rather metaphysical than moral and spiritual.
It paid little heed to the myths and mysteries by which
humanity had been seeking to solve its spiritual enigmas.
This long travail of humanity could not be ignored by a true
religious philosophy. Some means must be found to reconcile
ancient religious imagination with the best conception of the
Divine.
</p>

<p>
The problem indeed was not a new one, except in the sense
that an intense revival of religious faith or superstition
demanded a fresh théodicée. As early as the sixth century
<hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, the simple faith in legend had been shaken among the
higher minds in a great philosophic movement which extended
over many ages. Some had rejected the myths with scorn.
Others had proceeded by the method of more or less critical
selection. Others, again, strove to find in them a historical
kernel, or an esoteric meaning veiled in allegory. The same
methods reappeared in the age of Varro and Scaevola,<note place="foot">S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, iv. 27; vi.
2.</note> and,
five centuries later, in the theology of Macrobius.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. c. 17; cf. <hi rend="italic">Roman
Society in the Last Century of the W.
Empire</hi>, p. 77 (1st ed.).</note> The effort,
however, of the Platonists of the second century has a peculiar
interest, because some fresh elements have been added to the
great problem since the days of Xenophanes and Euhemerus
and Varro.
</p>

<p>
To Plutarch, theology is the crown of all philosophy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. 2.</note> To
form true and worthy conceptions of the Divine Being is not
less important than to pay Him pious worship. Plutarch’s
lofty conception of the Infinite and Supreme, like that of
Maximus of Tyre, dominates all his system. In a curious
<pb n="418"/><anchor id="Pg418"/>treatise on Isis and Osiris, he reviews many a device of scholastic
subtlety, many a crude guess of embryonic science, many a dream
of Pythagorean mysticism, to find an inner meaning in the
Egyptian myth. Yet it embalms, in all this frigid scholasticism,
the highest and purest expression of Plutarch’s idea of the
Supreme. In the end he breaks away from all lower mundane
conceptions of the Divine, and reveals a glimpse of the beatific
vision. <q>While we are here below,</q> he says, <q>encumbered by
bodily affections, we can have no intercourse with God, save as
in philosophic thought we may faintly touch Him, as in a dream.
But when our souls are released, and have passed into the region
of the pure, invisible, and changeless, this God will be their
guide and king who depend on Him and gaze with insatiable
longing on the beauty which may not be spoken of by the lips of
man.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. lxxix.</note> To Plutarch God is the One, Supreme, Eternal Being,
removed to an infinite distance from the mutable and mortal—the
Being of whom we can only predicate that <q>He is,</q> who lives
in an everlasting <q>now,</q> of whom it would be irrational and
impious to speak in the terms of the future or the past.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ΕΙ</foreign> ap. Delph.</hi> c. xix.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅθεν οὐδ’ ὅσιόν ἐστιν οὐδὲν τοῦ ὄντος λέγειν ὡς ἦν ἢ ἔσται</foreign>.</note> He
is the One, the Absolute of Eleatic or Pythagorean philosophy,
the Demiurgus of Plato, the primal motive power of Aristotle,
the World-Soul of the Stoics. Yet Plutarch is as far removed
from the Epicureanism which banishes God from the universe
as he is from the pantheism of east or west, which interfuses
the world and God.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 54, 78;
    <hi rend="italic">De <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ΕΙ</foreign> ap. Delph.</hi> c. 20; <hi rend="italic">Def. Or.</hi> c. 9, <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi>;
Oakesmith, <hi rend="italic">Rel. of Plut.</hi> p. 88; Zeller,
<hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2, p. 148; <hi rend="italic">De Is.
et Osir.</hi> c. 40, 66; <hi rend="italic">non p. Suav.</hi> c. 22,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">βοηθεῖν πέφυκεν, ὀργίζεσθαι δὲ καὶ κακῶς ποιεῖν οὐ πέφυκεν</foreign>: <hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi>
c. iv. v. xviii.; Nitsch, <hi rend="italic">De Plut. Theologo</hi>,
p. 8; Gréard, <hi rend="italic">Morale de Plut.</hi> p.
263; cf. Burgmann, <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s Theologie</hi>,
pp. 14-20.</note> Plutarch never abandons the Divine
personality, in whatever sense he may hold it. God is the
highest perfection of goodness and intelligence, the Creator, the
watchful and benevolent Providence of the world, the Author
of all good. His power, indeed, is not unlimited. There is a
power of evil in the world which must be recognised. And,
as good cannot be the author of evil, the origin of evil must
be sought in a separate and original principle, distinct from,
but not co-equal with, God: a principle recognised in many a
theology and philosophy of east and west, and called by many
<pb n="419"/><anchor id="Pg419"/>names—Ahriman or Hades, the <q>dyad</q> of Pythagoras, the
<q>strife</q> of Empedocles, the <q>other</q> of Plato.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 2, p. 152; <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. 45-49;
<hi rend="italic">De St. Rep.</hi> c. 33.</note> Its seat is the
World-Soul, which has a place alongside of God and Matter,
causing all that is deadly in nature, all moral disorder in the
soul of man. Matter is the seat both of evil and good.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De An. Procr.</hi> c. 6.</note> In
its lower regions it may seem to be wholly mastered by the
evil principle; yet in its essence it is really struggling towards
the good, and, as a female principle, susceptible to the formative
influence of the Divine, as well as exposed to the incursions of
evil. Plutarch’s theory of creation is, in the main, that of
the Timaeus, with mingled elements of Stoic cosmogony.
Through number and harmony the Divine Mind introduces
order into the mass of lawless chaos. But while God stands
outside the cosmos as its creator, He is not merely the divine
craftsman, but a penetrating power. For from Him proceeds
the soul which is interfused with the world and which sustains
it. Through the World-Soul, God is in touch with all powers
and provinces of the universe. Yet throughout the universe,
as in the human soul, there are always present the two elements
side by side, the principles of reason and unreason, of evil and
of good.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2,
p. 155; Plat. <hi rend="italic">Tim.</hi> 29, 30.</note>
</p>

<p>
The vision of the one eternal, passionless Spirit, far removed
from the world of chance and change and earthly soilure, was
the conquest of Greek philosophy, travailing for 800 years.
But it was a vision far withdrawn; it was separated by an
apparently impassable gulf alike from the dreams of Hellenic
legend and from the struggling life of humanity. The poets,
and even the poet of divinest inspiration, had bequeathed a mass
of legend, often shocking to the later moral sense, yet always
seductive by its imaginative charm. How to reconcile the
fictions of poetry, which had so long enthralled all imaginations,
with higher spiritual intuitions, that was the problem. It was
not indeed a new problem. It had driven Xenophanes into open
revolt, it had exercised the mind of the reverent Pindar and
the sceptical Euripides. It had suggested to Plato the necessity
of recasting myth in the light of the Divine purity.<note place="foot">Diog. Laert. ix. § 18,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">γέγραφε δὲ καὶ [Ξενοφάνης] ἰάμβους καθ’ Ἡσιόδου καὶ Ὁμήρου
ἐπισκώπτων αὐτῶν τὰ περὶ θεῶν εἰρημένα</foreign>: <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> extracts in Ritter
and Preller, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> p. 82; Plat.
<hi rend="italic">Rep.</hi> ii. pp. 378-380.</note> But the
<pb n="420"/><anchor id="Pg420"/>new Hellenism of the second century was a great literary, even
more than a theological or philosophic, movement; and the
glory of Greek literature was inseparably linked with the glory
and the shame of Greek mythology. To discard and repudiate
the myths was to give the lie to the divine poets. To explain
them away by physical allegory, in the fashion of the
Stoic theology, or to lower the <q>blessed ones</q> of Olympus
to the stature of earthly kings and warriors, after the manner
of Euhemerus, was to break the charm of poetic legend, and
violate the instincts of ancestral piety.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xxiii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὃς (Εὐήμερος) ... πᾶσαν αθεότητα κατασκεδάννυσι τῆς οἰκουμένης</foreign>.</note> And there were many
other claimants for devotion beside the ancient gods of Rome
and Greece. Persia and Phrygia, Commagene and Egypt, every
region from the Sahara to Cumberland, were adding to the
pantheon. Soldiers and travellers were bringing their tales of
genii and daemons from islands in the British seas and the
shores of the Indian Ocean.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. 18, 21.</note> How could a man trained in the
mystic monotheism of 800 years reconcile himself to this
immense accretion of alien superstition?
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, from whatever quarter, a new spiritual
vision had opened, strange to the ancient world. It is not merely
that the conception of God has become more pure and lofty;
the whole attitude of the higher minds to the Eternal had altered.
A great spiritual revolution had concurred with a great political
revolution. The vision of the divine world which satisfied men
in the age of Pericles or in the Punic wars, when religion,
politics, and morality were linked in unbroken harmony, when,
if spiritual vision was bounded, spiritual needs were less
clamorous, and the moral life less troubled and self-conscious,
could no longer appease the yearnings of the higher minds. Both
morality and religion had become less formal and external, more
penetrating and exigent. Prayer was no longer a formal litany
for worldly blessings or sinful indulgence, but a colloquy with
God, in a moment of spiritual exaltation.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 10, § 5; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 41, § 1; Pers.
ii. 73; Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xi. § 8,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">σὺ μὲν ἡγεῖ τὴν τοῦ φιλοσόφου εὐχὴν αἴτησιν τῶν οὐ παρόντων·
    ἐγὼ δὲ ὁμιλίαν καὶ διάλεκτον πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς περὶ τῶν παρόντων, κτλ.</foreign>: Martha, <hi rend="italic">Moralistes sous
l’Emp.</hi> p. 163; Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées Morales</hi>,
ii. p. 245 sqq.</note> The true sacrifice
was no longer <q>the blood of bulls,</q> but a quiet spirit. Along
with a sense of frailty and bewilderment, men felt the need of
<pb n="421"/><anchor id="Pg421"/>purification and spiritual support. The old mysteries and the
new cults from the East had fostered a longing for sacramental
peace and assurance of another life, in which the crooked should
be made straight and the perverted be restored.
</p>

<p>
In Maximus of Tyre,<note place="foot">Of the life of Maximus of Tyre little
is known. He began his career as a
teacher probably about 155 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> Like
other philosophers of his time, he had
travelled widely. See the references to
Arabia and Phrygia in <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii., <hi rend="italic">e.g.</hi>
§ 8,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἀράβιοι μὲν σέβουσι μὲν ὅντινα δὲ οὐκ οἶδα· τὸ δὲ ἄγαλμα εἶδον,
λίθος ἦν τετράγωνος</foreign>. Cf. Zeller, iii. 2, p. 183 n.</note> although he has no claim to the reputation
of a strong and original thinker, we see this new religious
spirit of the second century perhaps in its purest form. Man
is an enigma, a contradiction, a being placed on the confines of
two worlds. A beast in his fleshly nature, he is akin to God
in his higher part, nay, the son of God.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iv. § 7.</note> Even the noblest
spirits here below live in a sort of twilight, or in a heady excitement,
an intoxication of the senses. Yet, cramped as it is in
the prison of the flesh, the soul may raise itself above the misty
region of perpetual change towards the light of the Eternal. For,
in the slumber of this mortal life, the pure spirit is sometimes
visited by visions coming through the gate of horn,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvi. § 1, § 8.</note> visions
of another world seen in some former time. And, following
them, the moral hero, like Heracles, the model of strenuous
virtue, through toil and tribulation may gain the crown.
On this stormy sea of time, philosophy gives us the veil of
Leucothea to charm the troubled waters. It is true that only
when release comes at death, does the soul attain to the full vision
of God. For the Highest is separated from us by a great gulf.
Yet the analysis of the soul which Maximus partly borrows from
Aristotle, discovers His seat in us, the highest reason, that power
of intuitive, all-embracing, instantaneous vision, which is distinct
from the slower and tentative operations of the understanding.
It is by this higher faculty that God is seen, so far as He may
be, in this mixed and imperfect state.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xvii. § 8.</note> For the vision of God
can only in any degree be won by abstraction from sense and
passion and everything earthly, in a struggle ever upwards,
beyond the paths of the heavenly orbs, to the region of eternal
calm <q>where falls not rain or hail or any snow, but a white
cloudless radiance spreads over all.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 10.</note> And when may we see
God? <q>Thou shalt see Him fully,</q> Maximus says, <q>only when
<pb n="422"/><anchor id="Pg422"/>He calls thee, in age or death, but meantime glimpses of the
Beauty which eye hath not seen nor can tongue speak of, may
be won, if the veils and wrappings which hide His splendour
be torn away.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xvii. § 11.</note> But do not thou profane Him by offering vain
prayers for earthly things which belong to the world of chance
or which may be obtained by human effort, things for which the
worthy need not pray, and which the unworthy will not obtain.
The only prayer which is answered, is the prayer for goodness,
peace, and hope in death.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xi. § 2, § 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
How could a Platonist of the second century, we may ask,
holding such a spiritual creed, reconcile himself to Greek
mythology, nay, to all the mythologies, with all the selfish grossness
of their ritual? Plutarch and Maximus of Tyre answer
the question by a piously ingenious interpretation of ancient
legend, and partly by a system of daemons, of mediating and
ministering spirits, who fill the interval between the changeless
Infinite and the region of sin and change.
</p>

<p>
In religion, they say, in effect, we must take human nature
as we find it. We are not legislating for a young race, just
springing from the earth, but for races with conceptions of
the Divine which run back through countless ages. There may
be, here and there, an elect few who can raise their minds, in
rare moments, to the pure vision of the Eternal. But heaven is so
far from earth, and earth is so darkened by the mists of sense,
that temple and image and sacred litany, and the myths created
by the genius of poets, or imposed by lawgivers, are needed to
sustain and give expression to the vague impotent yearnings of
the mass of men.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. § 2,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ ἀσθενὲς ὃν κομιδῇ τὸ ἀνθρωπεῖον καὶ διεστὸς τοῦ θείου
ὅσον οὐρανοῦ γῆ, σημεῖα ταῦτα ἐμηχανήσατο</foreign>.</note> The higher intuitions of religion must be
translated into material symbolism; <q>here we see, as through
a glass darkly.</q> And the symbols of sacred truth are as various
as the many tribes of men. Some, like the Egyptian worship
of animals, are of a degraded type. The Greek anthropomorphism,
although falling far short of the grandeur and purity of
the Infinite, yet furnishes its noblest image, because it has glorified
by artistic genius the human body, which has been chosen as
the earthly home of the rational soul.<note place="foot">Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 59 (404 R).</note> And the cause of myth
and plastic art are really one; nay, there is no opposition or
con<pb n="423"/><anchor id="Pg423"/>trast, in fact, between poetic mythology and religious philosophy.
They are different methods of teaching religious truth, adapted
to different stages of intellectual development. Myth is the
poetic philosophy of a simple age, for whose ears the mystic
truth must be sweetened by music, an age whose eyes cannot
bear to gaze on the Divine splendour unveiled.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> x. § 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἡ ψυχὴ ... ἐδεῖτο φιλοσοφίας μουσικῆς τινος κτλ.</foreign> Cf.
§ 5,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντα μεστὰ αἰνιγμάτων καὶ παρὰ ποιηταῖς καὶ παρὰ φιλοσόφοις</foreign>.</note> Philosophic
theology is for an age of rationalism and inquiry; it would have
been unintelligible to the simple imaginative childhood of the
race. Maximus has the same faith as Plutarch that the
mythopoeic age possessed, along with an enthralling artistic
skill, all the speculative depth and subtlety of later ages. It
is almost a profanity to imagine that Homer or Hesiod or
Pindar were less of philosophers than Aristotle or Chrysippus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x. § 3.</note>
It was assumed that the early myth-makers and lawgivers
possessed a sacred lore of immense value and undoubted truth,
which they dimly shadowed forth in symbolism of fanciful
tale or allegory.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> lxviii.; xx.; Max. Tyr.
x. §§ 5-7; cf. Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 2,
7-19; Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hibbert Lec.</hi> p. 55 sq.</note> The myth at once hides and reveals the
mystery of the Divine. If a man comes to its interpretation
with the proper discipline and acumen, the kernel of spiritual
or physical meaning which is reverently veiled from the profane
eye will disclose itself. And thus the later philosophic
theologian is not reading his own higher thoughts of God into
the grotesque fancies of a remote antiquity; he is evolving
and interpreting a wisdom more original than his own. In
this process of rediscovering a lost tradition, he pushes aside
the mass of erroneous interpretations which have perverted
the original doctrine, by literal acceptance of what is really
figurative, by abuse of names and neglect of realities, by
stopping at the symbol instead of rising to the divine fact.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> lxvi. <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The treatise of Plutarch on Isis and Osiris is the best
illustration of this attitude to myth. Plutarch’s theology,
though primarily Hellenic, does not confine its gaze to the
Greek Olympus; it is intended to be the science of human
religion in general. It gives formal expression to the growing
tendency to syncretism. The central truth of it is, that as
the sun and moon, under many different names, shed their
<pb n="424"/><anchor id="Pg424"/>light on all, so the gods are variously invoked and honoured
by various tribes of men.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. lxvii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὥσπερ ἥλιος καὶ σελήνη καὶ οὐρανὸς καὶ γῆ κοινὰ πᾶσιν,
ὀνομάζεται δ’ ἄλλος ὑπ’ ἄλλων, οὕτως ἑνὸς λόγου τοῦ ταῦτα κοσμοῦντος
καὶ μιᾶς προνοίας ἐπιτροπευούσης, καὶ δυνάμεων ὑπουργῶν
ἐπὶ πάντας τεταγμένων, ἕτεραι παρ’ ἑτέροις κατὰ νόμους
γεγόνασι τιμαὶ καὶ προσηγορίαι, κτλ.</foreign></note> But there is one supreme Ruler
and Providence common to all. And the lower deities of
different countries may often be identified by the theologian,
under all varieties of title and attribute. So, to Plutarch as
to Herodotus, the immemorial worships of Egypt were the
prototypes or the counterparts of the cults of Greece.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. lxi.; xxxv.; cf. Herodot. ii.
c. 50.</note> There
was a temple of Osiris at Delphi, and Clea, to whom Plutarch’s
treatise is addressed, was not only a hereditary priestess of the
Egyptian god, but held a leading place among the female
ministers of Dionysus.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xxxv.</note> It was fitting that a person so
catholic in her sympathies should have dedicated to her the
treatise in which Plutarch expounds his all-embracing theology.
</p>

<p>
In this treatise we see the new theology wrestling in a
hopeless struggle to unite the thought of Pythagoras and
Plato with the grossness of Egyptian myth. It is a striking,
but not a solitary, example of the misapplication of dialectic
skill and learning, to find the thoughts of the present in the
fancies of the past, and from a mistaken piety, to ignore the
onward march of humanity. Arbitrary interpretations of
myth, alike unhistorical and unscientific, make us wonder how
they could ever have occurred to men of intellect and learning.
Yet the explanation is not far to seek. More elevated conceptions
of God, the purged and clarified religious intuition,
do not readily find a substitute for the old symbolism to
express their visions. Religion, beyond any other institution,
depends for its power on antiquity, on the charm of ancestral
pieties. A religious symbol is doubly sacred when it has ministered
to the devotion of many generations.
</p>

<p>
In interpreting the powerful cult of Isis, which was spreading
rapidly over the western world, Plutarch had two objects
in view. By reverent explanation of its legends and ritual, he
desired to counteract its immoral and superstitious tendencies;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xx.</note>
he also wished, in discussing a worship so multiform as that
of Isis, to develop his attitude to myth in general. We
<pb n="425"/><anchor id="Pg425"/>cannot follow him minutely in his survey of the various
attempts of philosophy to find the basis of truth in Egyptian
legend. Some of these explanations, such as the Euhemerist,
he would dismiss at once as atheistic.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xxiii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πᾶσαν ἀθεότητα κατασκεδάννυσι τῆς οἰκουμένης</foreign>.</note> On others, which
founded themselves on physical allegory, he would not be
so dogmatic, although he might reject as impious any tendency
to identify the gods with natural powers and products.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. lxvi.</note> As
a positive contribution to religious philosophy, the treatise is
chiefly valuable for its theory of Evil and of daemonic powers,
and above all for the doctrine of the unity of God, the central
truth of all religions.
</p>

<p>
The daemonology of the Platonists of the second century
had its roots deep in the Hellenic past, as it was destined to
have a long future. But it was specially evoked by the needs
of the pagan revival of the Antonine age. The doctrine had
assumed many forms in previous Greek thought from the days
of Hesiod, and it has various aspects, and serves various
purposes, in the hands of Plutarch, Apuleius, and Maximus of
Tyre. It was in the first place an apologetic for heathenism
in an age distracted between a lofty conception of one infinite
Father and legends of many lands and many ages, which were
consecrated by long tradition, yet often shocking to the spiritual
sense. As the conception of God became purer and seemed to
withdraw into remoter distances, souls like Apuleius, wedded
to the ancient rites, found in the daemons, ranging between
earth and ether, the means of conveying answers to prayer, of
inspiring dreams and prophecy, of ordering all the machinery
of divination.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">De Deo Socr.</hi> c. vi. (133).</note> To others, such as Maximus of Tyre, the
doctrine seemed to discover a spiritual support for human
frailty, guardians in temptation and the crises of life, mediators
between the human spirit, immured for a time in the prison
of the flesh, and the remote purity of the Supreme.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiv. §§ 7, 8.</note> To other
minds the daemon is no external power, but dwelling within
each soul, as its divine part, a kind of ideal personality,<note place="foot">Cf. Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. 361, 1. M.
Aurel. v. 10, 27,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅτι ἔξεστί μοι μηδὲν πρᾶττειν παρὰ τὸν ἐμὸν θεὸν καὶ δαίμονα</foreign>:
vii. 17; Epict. i. 14, § 12,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ (ὁ θεὸς) ἐπίτροπον ἑκάστῳ παρέστησε, τὸν ἑκάστου δαίμονα,
καὶ παρέδωκε φυλάσσειν αὐτὸν αὐτῷ, κτλ.</foreign></note> in
following whose ghostly promptings lies the secret of happiness.
<pb n="426"/><anchor id="Pg426"/>Finally, the doctrine created an eschatology by which vistas
of moral perfection were opened before purer spirits in worlds
to come, and the infinite responsibilities of this life were
terribly enforced by threats of endless degradation.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Sera Num. Vind.</hi> c.
xxii.</note>
</p>

<p>
The daemons who came to the aid of mythology
in the Antonine age, were composite beings, with a double
nature corresponding to the two worlds of the Divine and
human which they linked together. They are at once divine
in power and knowledge, and akin to humanity in feeling and
passion.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">De Deo Socr.</hi> c. xiii.; Max.
Tyr. xv. § 4; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. x.</note> They are even liable to mortality, as was proved by
the famous tale of the voice which floated to the Egyptian
pilot from the Echinad isles, announcing that the great Pan
was dead.<note place="foot">Plut <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. xvii.</note> Their sphere is the middle space between the lofty
ether and the mists of earth. This spiritual mediation, as
Maximus points out, is not an exceptional principle. There is a
chain of being in the universe, as it had been developed in the
cosmic theory of Aristotle, by which the remote extremes are
linked in successive stages, and may be blended or reconciled,
in a mean or compound, as in a musical harmony. The
principle is seen operating in the relation of the great physical
elements. Thus, for example, fire and water are at opposite
poles: they cannot pass immediately into one another, but air
furnishes a medium between the two, and reconciles their
opposition by participating in the warmth of the one element
and in the moisture of the other.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. xv. § 3.</note> The suggestions of cosmic
theory seemed to receive support from many tales which, in
that age of luxuriant superstition, were accepted even in
educated circles. Travellers, returning from Britain, told
weird stories of desolate islands in the northern seas which
were the haunts of genii.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. xviii.</note> A Spartan visitor to Delphi related
how, on the shores of the Indian Ocean, he had met with a
hermit of a beautiful countenance and proof against all disease,
who spoke with many tongues, and derived his mystic powers
from intercourse with the spirits which haunted those distant
solitudes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xxi.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch also justifies his theory of daemons by an appeal
to the authority of Hesiod, of Pythagoras and Plato, Xenocrates
<pb n="427"/><anchor id="Pg427"/>and Chrysippus.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xxv.; <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi>
c. x.</note> He might have added others to the list.
For, indeed, the conception of these mediators between the
ethereal world and the world of sense has a long history—too
long to be developed within our present limits. Its earliest
appearance in Greece was in the <hi rend="italic">Works and Days</hi> of Hesiod, who
first definitely sketched a great scale of being—gods, heroes,
daemons, and mortal men. Hesiod’s daemons are the men of
the golden age, translated to a blissful and immortal life, yet
linked in sympathy with those still on earth—<q>Ministers of
good and guardians of men.</q><note place="foot">Hes. <hi rend="italic">Op. et D.</hi> 125; cf. Rohde,
<hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, i. p. 96.</note> The conception was introduced
at a time when new moral and spiritual forces were at work,
which were destined to have a profound and lasting influence
on paganism for a thousand years. The glamour of the radiant
Olympus and the glory of heroic battle were fading. Men were
settling down to humdrum toil, and becoming acutely conscious
of the troubles and sadness of life. With a craving for
support and comfort which the religion of Homer could not
give, the pessimist view of life, which colours Hesiod’s poetry,
sought consolation in a mysticism altogether strange to Homer,
and even to Hesiod. The feeling that humanity had declined
from a glorious prime and, in its weakness and terror at death,
needed some new consolations, was met by a system which,
although Orpheus may never have existed, will always be
called by his name.<note place="foot">For the spiritual influences at
work <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Lobeck, <hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> p. 312;
Grote, i. p. 23; Bury, <hi rend="italic">Hist. of Greece</hi>,
p. 312; Hardie, <hi rend="italic">Lectures</hi>, p. 57.</note> The Chthonian deities, Dionysus and
Demeter, sprang into a prominence which they had not in
Homer. The immortal life began to overshadow the present,
and in the mysteries men found some assurance of immortality,
and preparation for it by cleansing from the stains of time.
That idea, which was to have such profound influence upon
later thought, that there is a divine element in man, which is
emancipated from the prison of the flesh at death, became an
accepted doctrine. At the same time, the faith in helpers and
mediators, half human, half divine, lent itself to the support
of human weakness. The heroic soul who passed victoriously
through the ordeal of this life, might in another world become
the guardian and exemplar of those who were still on earth.
</p>

<p>
In the Ionian and Eleatic schools the doctrine was held
<pb n="428"/><anchor id="Pg428"/>in some sense by all the great thinkers, by Thales, Anaximander,
Heraclitus, Xenophanes. To Thales the world was
full of daemons.<note place="foot">Diog. Laert. i. 27,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀρχὴν δὲ τῶν πάντων ὕδωρ ὑπεστήσατο, καὶ τὸν κόσμον
ἔμψυχον καὶ δαιμόνων πλήρη</foreign>.</note> In the mystic teaching of Heraclitus the
universe teems with such spirits, for in the perpetual flux and
change, the divine is constantly passing into the death of
mortal life and the mortal into the divine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Heracl. Reliq.</hi> p. 26 Bywater,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἀθάνατοι θνητοί, θνητοὶ ἀθάνατοι ζῶντες τὸν ἐκείνων θάνατον,
τὸν δὲ ἐκείνων βίον τεθνεῶντες. ὁ δὲ Ἡράκλειτός φησιν ὅτι
καὶ τὸ ζῆν καὶ τὸ ἀποθανεῖν καὶ ἐν τῷ ζῆν ἡμᾶς ἐστι
καὶ ἐν τῷ τεθνάναι, κτλ.</foreign>
Cf. <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀνὴρ νήπιος ἤκουσε πρὸς δαίμονος ὅπωσπερ παῖς πρὸς ἀνδρός</foreign>. Ritter and
Preller, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> p. 23; Diog.
Laert. ix. 1, § 7.</note> Empedocles, in
conformity with his cosmic dualism, first made the distinction
between good and bad daemons, and followed Pythagoras in
connecting daemonic theory with the doctrine of a fall from
divine estate, and long exile and incarnation in animal forms.<note place="foot">Ritter and Preller, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> pp.
126, 7; Hild, <hi rend="italic">Étude sur les Démons</hi>,
p. 228.</note>
It was in the dim system of Pythagoras that the doctrine
became a really religious tenet, as it was to the Platonists of
the Antonine age. Pythagoras was more priest and mystic
than philosopher. He had far more in common with the
Orphici, with Abaris and Epimenides, than with Thales or
Anaximander. His school, for we can hardly speak of himself,
connected the doctrine of daemons with the doctrines of metempsychosis
and purification and atonement in another world.
Souls released from the prison-house of the flesh are submitted
to a purgatorial cleansing of a thousand years. Some pass the
ordeal victoriously, and ascend to higher spheres. Others are
kept in chains by the Erinnyes. The beatified souls become
daemons or good spirits, ranging over the universe, and
manifesting themselves in dreams and omens and ghostly
monitions, sometimes becoming even visible to the eye.<note place="foot">Diog. Laert. viii. 1, § 30 sqq.</note> But
their highest function is to guide men in the path of virtue
during life, and after death to purify the disembodied spirit,
which may become a daemon in its turn. This is the theory,
which, with some modifications, was adopted by the later
Platonists. It was popularised by Pindar, <q>the Homer of the
Pythagorean school.</q> He was captivated by its doctrine of
the migrations of the soul, of its ordeal in a future life, and
its chastisement or elevation to lofty spiritual rank as daemon
or hero. In the second Olympian ode, the punishment of the
<pb n="429"/><anchor id="Pg429"/>wicked and the beatitude of noble spirits, in the company
of Peleus and Achilles in the happy isles, are painted in all
the glowing imagery of the Apocalypse.<note place="foot">Pind. <hi rend="italic">Ol.</hi> ii. 105 sqq.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἔνθα μακάρων νᾶσος ὠκεανίδες αὖραι περιπνέοισιν·
ἄνθεμα δὲ χρυσοῦ φλέγει τὰ μὲν χερσόθεν ἀπ’ ἀγλαῶν δενδρέων,
ὕδωρ δ’ ἄλλα φέρβει</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The daemonology of Pythagoras, along with the doctrine
of metempsychosis in its moral aspect, was adopted by Plato,
whether as a serious theory or as a philosophic myth. The
chief passages in Plato where the daemons are mentioned are
suffused with such mythic colour that it would perhaps be rash
to extract from them any sharp dogmatic theory.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> 202 <hi rend="small">E</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Polit.</hi> 271 <hi rend="small">D</hi>;
<hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 107 <hi rend="small">D</hi>, 108 <hi rend="small">B</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Tim.</hi> 90 <hi rend="small">A</hi>.</note> But Plato,
holding firmly the remote purity of God, strove to fill the
interval between the mortal and the Infinite by a graded scheme
of superhuman beings. The daemon is a compound of the
mortal and the divine, spanning the chasm between them. This
is the power which conveys to God the prayers and sacrifices of
men, and brings to men the commands and rewards of the gods,
which operates in prophecy, sacrifice, and mystery. And again
the daemon is a power which is assigned to each soul at birth,
and which at death conducts it to the eternal world, to receive
judgment for its deeds, and perhaps to be condemned to return
once more to earth. The reason in man, his truly divine part,
is also called his daemon, his good genius. It is the power
whose kindred is with the world of the unseen, which is immortal,
and capable of a lofty destiny.
</p>

<p>
Like his master Plato, Maximus of Tyre seems to know
nothing of the evil daemons, who, as we shall presently see,
were used by Plutarch to account for the immorality of myth.
To Maximus the daemons are rather angelic ministers, sent
forth to advise and succour weak mortal men.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiv. § 8.</note> They are
the necessary mediators between the one Supreme and our
frail mortal life. Dwelling in a region between earth and ether,
they are of mingled mortal and divine nature, weaker than the
gods, stronger than men, servants of God and overseers of men,
by kinship with either linking the weakness of the mortal with
the Divine. Great is the multitude of this heavenly host,
interpreters between God and man: <q>thrice ten thousand are
they upon the fruitful earth, immortal, ministers of Zeus,</q>
healers of the sick, revealers of what is dark, aiding the
<pb n="430"/><anchor id="Pg430"/>craftsman, companions of the wayfarer. On land and sea, in
the city and the field, they are ever with us. They inspired a
Socrates, a Pythagoras, a Diogenes, or a Zeno; they are present
in all human spirits. Only the lost and hopeless soul is
without the guardianship of such an unearthly friend.
</p>

<p>
The earlier Platonist or Pythagorean daemonology was not
employed to explain or rehabilitate polytheism. Although
Plato would not banish myth from his Utopia, he placed his
ban on the mythopoeic poets who had lent their authority to
tales and crimes and passions of the gods. Myth could only
be tolerated in the education of the young if it conformed
to the standard of Divine perfection.<note place="foot">Plat. <hi rend="italic">Rep.</hi> ii. 377-380.</note> God cannot be the
author of evil, evil is the offspring of matter; it is a
limitation or an incident of the fleeting world of sense. It is
only relative and transitory, and can never penetrate the realm
of the ideal. But to Plutarch evil was an ultimate principle
in the universe, ever present along with the good, although
not perhaps of equal range and power.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xlv.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">αἰτίαν δὲ κακοῦ τἀγαθὸν οὐκ ἂν παράσχοι, δεῖ γένεσιν
ἰδίαν καὶ ἀρχήν, ὥσπερ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ κακοῦ, τὴν φύσιν ἔχειν</foreign>: cf. Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hibbert
Lec.</hi> p. 218.</note> And Plutarch would
not banish and disown the poets for attributing to the gods
passions and crimes which would have been dishonouring to
humanity. He would not abandon the ancient ritual because
it contained elements of gloom and impurity which shocked
a refined moral sense. Mythology and ritual, as they had been
moulded by poets or imposed by lawgivers, were intertwined
with the whole life of the people and formed an essential
element in the glory of Hellenic genius. The piety and
aesthetic feeling of the priest of Delphi still clung to ancient
ritual and legend, even when the lofty morality of the Platonist
was offended by the grossness which mingled with their artistic
charm. Might it not be possible to moralise the pagan system
without discrediting its authors, to reconcile the claims of
reason and conservative religious feeling? Might it not be
possible to save at once the purity and majesty of God and the
inspiration of the poets?
</p>

<p>
To Plutarch the doctrine of daemons seemed to furnish an
answer to this question; it also satisfied other spiritual cravings
which were equally urgent. The need of some mixed nature
<pb n="431"/><anchor id="Pg431"/>to mediate between the ethereal world and the region of
sense became all the more imperious as the philosophic conception
of God receded into a more remote and majestic purity.
The gradation of spiritual powers, which had been accepted by
so many great minds from the time of Hesiod, at once guarded
the aloofness of the Supreme and satisfied the craving of the
religious instinct for some means of contact with it, for divine
help in the trials of time. These mediating spirits were also
made in Plutarch’s theology to furnish an explanation of
oracles and all forms of prophecy, of the inspired enthusiasm
of artist, sage, and poet. Finally, the theory, with the aid of
mythic fancy, cast a light on the fate of souls beyond the
grave, and vindicated the Divine justice by a vision of a judgment
to come.
</p>

<p>
Plutarch’s daemonology, as he admits himself, is an inheritance
from the past. The daemons are beings half divine, half
human; they are godlike in power and intelligence, they
are human in liability to the passions engendered by the flesh.
This host of spirits dwell in the borderland below the moon,
between the pure changeless region of the celestial powers and
the region of the mutable and the mortal. Linking the two
worlds together by their composite nature, the daemons differ in
degrees of virtue; some are more akin to the Divine perfection,
others more tainted by the evil of the lower world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xxvi.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὡς τῶν δαιμόνων μικτὴν καὶ ἀνώμαλον φύσιν ἐχόντων καὶ προαίρεσον</foreign>: <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. x., c. xvi.</note> The good
spirits, as they are described by Maximus of Tyre, are true
servants of God and faithful guardians of human virtue. But
the bad daemons assume a special prominence in the theology
of Plutarch. Nor was the development unnatural. His
conception of immortality, and the necessity of purification in
another world, raised the question as to the destiny of souls
whose stains were indelible. If purified souls are charged as
daemons with offices of mercy, may not the impure prolong their
guilt in plaguing and corrupting mankind? May not the existence
of such sombre spirits account for the evil in the world, the
existence of which cannot be blinked? Although there are traces
of this moral dualism long before Plutarch’s time, both in Greek
poetry and speculation, it was Xenocrates who first formulated
the doctrine of evil daemons in relation to mythology.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. xxv.</note> <q>It
can<pb n="432"/><anchor id="Pg432"/>not be,</q> he taught, <q>that unlucky days and festivals, conducted
with scourgings and fasts, lamentations and lacerations and
impure words and deeds, are celebrated in honour of the blessed
gods or good daemons. They are rather offered to those
powerful and terrible spirits of evil in the air whose sombre
character is propitiated by such gloomy rites.</q> These
sinister spirits assert their vast power, and display their
malevolence, not only in plague, pestilence, and dearth, and all
the desolating convulsions of the physical world, but in the
moral perversion and deception of the human race. They are
accountable for all that shocks the moral sense in the impure
or ghastly tales which the poets have told of the gods,
and in the gloomy or obscene rites which are celebrated
in their honour. The poets and early myth-makers have not
invented the evil in myth and rite; they have been deceived
as to the authors of the evil. Each of the blessed gods has
attached to him a daemon who is in some respects his counterpart,
wielding his power, but who may perpetrate every kind of
moral enormity in his name, and who demands to be honoured
and propitiated after his own evil nature. The bad daemons,
in fact, masquerade as gods and bring disgrace upon them. It
was not the Blessed Ones who mutilated a father, who raised
rebellion in Olympus and were driven into exile, who stooped to
be the lovers of mortal women. These are the works of spirits
of evil, using their fiendish cunning to deceive a simple
age. Its poetry was seduced to cast a magical charm over
their lusts and crimes; its superstition was terrified into
appeasing the fiends by shameful orgies or dark bloody rites.
Poets and founders of ritual have been faithful to supernatural
fact, but they did not see that in the supernatural order there are
evil powers as well as good. They are sound in their record
but wrong in their interpretation. In this fashion Plutarch
and his school strove to reconcile a rational faith with the
grossness of superstition, to save the holiness of God and the
glory of Homer.
</p>

<p>
But the bad daemons who were called in to save the
ancient cults proved dangerous allies in the end. Few who
really know him will be inclined to question the sincere monotheistic
piety of Plutarch. And a sympathetic critic will even
not withhold from him a certain respect for his old-world
<pb n="433"/><anchor id="Pg433"/>attachment to the forms of his ancestral worship. He knew
no other avenue of approaching the Divine. Yet only the
imperious religious cravings and the spiritual contradictions of
that age could excuse or account for a system which was
disastrous both to paganism and philosophy. The union of
gross superstition with ingenious theology, the licence of
subtlety applied to the ancient legends, demanded too much
credulity from the cultivated and too much subtlety from
the vulgar. It undermined the already crumbling polytheism;
it made philosophy the apostle of a belief in a baleful
daemonic agency. If a malign genius was seated beside every
god to account for the evil in nature or myth, might not a day
come when both friends and enemies would confound the
daemon and the god?<note place="foot">Mr. Oakesmith thinks that Plutarch
tended to identify them, <hi rend="italic">Rel. of Plut.</hi>
p. 127.</note> Might not philosophy be led on in a
disastrous decline to the justification of magic, incantations,
and all theurgic extravagance? That day did come in the
fourth century when Platonism and polytheism in close league
were making a last stand against the victorious Church. Even
then indeed a purer Platonism still survived, as well as a purer
paganism sustained by the mysteries of Mithra or Demeter.
But the paganism which the Christian empire found it hardest
to conquer, and which propagated itself far into the Christian
ages, was the belief in magic and occult powers founded on
the doctrine of daemons. And the Christian controversialist,
with as firm a faith in daemons as the pagan, turned that
doctrine against the faith which it was invented to support.
The distinction of good and bad daemons, first drawn by
Xenocrates and Chrysippus, and developed by Plutarch, was
eagerly seized upon by Tatian and S. Clement of Alexandria, by
Minucius Felix and S. Cyprian.<note place="foot">Tatian, <hi rend="italic">Adv. Gr.</hi> 20; Clem. Alex.
<hi rend="italic">Ad Gent.</hi> 26; Cypr. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 75, 10; Min.
Felix, c. 26, 27, isti igitur impuri
spiritus daemones, ... sub statuis et
imaginibus delitescunt, et adflatu suo
auctoritatem quasi praesentis numinis
consequuntur, dum inspirant interim
vates, dum fanis immorantur ...
sortes regunt, oracula efficiunt, falsis
pluribus involuta, etc. Cf. Tertull.
<hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> c. xxii. operatio eorum est
hominis eversio.... Itaque corporibus
quidem et valitudines infligunt et aliquos
casus acerbos, etc. Cf. <hi rend="italic">De Idol.</hi>
c. ix; Maury, <hi rend="italic">La Magie</hi>, p. 99 sqq.</note> But the good became the
heavenly host of Christ and His angels; the bad were identified
with the pagan gods. What would have been the anguish of
Plutarch could he have foreseen that his theology, elaborated
<pb n="434"/><anchor id="Pg434"/>with such pious subtlety and care, would one day be used
against the gracious powers of Olympus, and that the spirits
he had conjured up to defend them would be exorcised
as maleficent fiends by the triumphant dialectic of S.
Augustine.<note place="foot">Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, viii. 14-22.</note>
</p>

<p>
The daemonology of Plutarch also furnished a theory of
prophetic powers, and especially of the inspiration of Delphi.
It was in the porticoes of the shrine of Apollo, or among the
monuments of ancient glory and devotion, that the most interesting
of Plutarch’s religious essays were inspired. He probably
bore the honours of the Delphic priesthood down to the last days
of his long life. But in the years when Plutarch was ordering
a sacrifice or a procession, or discussing antiquarian and philosophic
questions with travellers from Britain or the eastern
seas, Delphi had lost much of its ancient power and renown.
Great political and great economic changes had reduced the
functions of the oracle to a comparatively humble sphere. It
was no longer consulted on affairs of state by great potentates
of the East and West. The farmers of Boeotia or the Arcadian
shepherds now came to seek the causes of failure in their
crops or of a murrain among their herds, to ask advice about
the purchase of a piece of land or the marriage of a child. So
far back as the days of Cicero the faith in oracles had been
greatly shaken,<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> ii. 57, 117, cur isto
modo jam oracula Delphis non eduntur
... ut nihil possit esse contemptius?
Strab. vii. 7, 9,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐκλέλοιπε δέ πως καὶ τὸ μαντεῖον τὸ ἐν Δωδώνῃ καθάπερ τἆλλα</foreign>.</note> and even the most venerable shrines were no
longer resorted to as of old. Powerful philosophic schools,
the Cynic and the Epicurean, poured contempt on all the arts
of divination. Many of the ancient oracles had long been
silent. In Boeotia, where, in the days of Herodotus, the air
was full of inspiration,<note place="foot">Herodot. viii. 134.</note> the ancient magic only lingered around
Lebadea. Sheep grazed around the fanes of Tegyra and the
Ptoan Apollo. While in old days at Delphi, the services of
two, and even three, Pythian priestesses were demanded by the
concourse of votaries, in Plutarch’s time one priestess sufficed.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. v. viii.</note>
But the second century brought, along with a general religious
revival, a restoration of the ancient faith in oracles. The
voice of Delphi had been silenced for a time by Nero, and
the sacred chasm had been choked with corpses because the
<pb n="435"/><anchor id="Pg435"/>priestess had branded the emperor as another Orestes.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxiii. 14,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ τὸ μαντεῖον κατέλυσεν, ἀνθρώπους ἐς τὸ στόμιον,
ἐξ οὗ τὸ ἱερὸν πνεῦμα ἀνῄει, σφάξας</foreign>.</note> But the
oracle, although shorn of much of its glory, recovered some of
its popularity in the second century. It received offerings
once more from wealthy votaries. The emperor Hadrian
characteristically tested its omniscience by a question as to
the birthplace of Homer. Curious travellers from distant
lands, even philosophers of the Cynic and Epicurean schools,
came to visit the ancient shrine, to make the round of its
antiquarian treasures, and to discuss the secret of its inspiration.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. ii.</note>
A new town sprang up at the gates of the sanctuary;
sumptuous temples, baths, and halls of assembly replaced the
solitude and ruins of many generations. The god himself
seemed to the pious Plutarch to have returned in power to his
ancient seat.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Pyth. Or.</hi> c. xxix.; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Gréard,
p. 252.</note>
</p>

<p>
The revival of Delphi gladdened the heart of Plutarch as
a sign of reviving religion and Hellenism. And although the
oracle no longer wielded an oecumenical primacy, its antiquities
and its claims to inspiration evidently attracted many curious
inquirers. We are admitted to their conversations in the
Delphic treatises of Plutarch. His characters bear the names
of the old-world schools, but there is a strangely modern tone
in their discussions. Sometimes we might fancy ourselves
listening to a debate on the inspiration of Scripture between
an agnostic, a Catholic, and an accommodating broad Churchman.
Plutarch himself, or his representative, generally holds
the balance between the extreme views, and tries to reconcile
the claims of reason and of faith. It is clear that even in
that age of religious revival there was no lack of a scepticism
like that of Lucian. Even in the sacred courts of Delphi the
Epicurean might be heard suggesting that, because, among a
thousand random prophecies of natural events, one here and
there may seem to tally with the fact, it does not follow that
the prediction was sure and true at the moment of deliverance;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Pyth. Or.</hi> c. x.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τοῦτό γε μᾶλλον ῥίψαι καὶ διασπεῖραι λόγους ...
οἷς πλανωμένοις ἀπῄντῃσε πολλάκις ἡ τύχη, κτλ.</foreign></note>
the wandering word may sometimes hit the mark. The
fulfilment is a mere coincidence, a happy chance. Boethus, the
sceptic, is easily refuted by the orthodox Serapion, who makes an
<pb n="436"/><anchor id="Pg436"/>appeal to well-known oracles which have been actually fulfilled,
not merely in a loose, apparent fashion, but down to the
minutest details of time, place, and manner.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Pyth. Or.</hi> c. xi.</note> In these discussions,
although the caviller is heard with a tolerant courtesy,
it is clear that faith is always in the ascendant. Yet even
faith has to face and account for an apparent degeneracy
which might well cause some uneasiness. For instance, is it
not startling that, in the name of the god of music, many oracles
should be delivered in trivial, badly-fashioned verses?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. v. xvii.</note> Can
it be that Apollo is a meaner artist than Hesiod or Homer?
On the other side, it may be said that the god is too lofty to
care to deck his utterances in the graces of literary form, or,
by a more probable theory, he inspires the vision but not the
verse. But what of the oracles of later days, which are
delivered in the baldest prose? Is this not a disturbing sign
of degeneracy? Can this be worthy of the god? The defender
of the faith has no difficulty in quieting the suspicion. Even
in the great ages we know that oracles were sometimes
delivered in prose,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xix.</note> and in ancient times excited feeling ran
naturally into verse.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xxiii.</note> The stately hexameter was the
appropriate form of utterance when the oracle had to deal with
great events affecting the fate of cities and of nations.
Inspiration is not independent of surrounding circumstances,
and the functions of the oracle have changed since the days of
Croesus and Themistocles. The whole style of human life and
the taste of men are less imposing and stately. The change
in the style of the oracle is only part of a general movement.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xxiv.</note>
For ages simple prose has taken the place of artistic rhythm in
other departments besides the sphere of prophecy. We do
not despise the philosophy of Socrates and Plato, because it
does not come to us clothed in verse, like the speculations of
Thales, Parmenides, and Empedocles. And who can expect the
simple peasant girl, who now occupies the tripod, to speak in
the tones of Homer?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xxii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τραφεῖσα ἐν οἰκίᾳ γεωργῶν πενήτων κτλ.</foreign></note> The dim grandeur of the old poetic
oracles had indeed some advantages, in aiding the memory by
the use of measured and musical expression, and in veiling the
full meaning of the God from irreverent or hostile eyes. But
<pb n="437"/><anchor id="Pg437"/>their pompous ambiguity, providing apparently so many loopholes
for evasion, brought discredit on the sacred art, and
encouraged the imitative ingenuity of a host of venal
impostors who, around the great temples, cheated the ears of
slaves and silly women with a mockery of the mysterious
solemnity of the Pythian verse.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Pyth. Or.</hi> c. xxv.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πλείστης μέντοι ποιητικὴν ἐνέπλησεν ἀδοξίας τὸ ἀγυρτικὸν
καὶ ἀγοραῖον καὶ περὶ τὰ μητρῷα καὶ σεράπεια
βωμολόχον καὶ πλανώμενον γένος κτλ.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
The more serious question as to the cause of the extinction
of oracles brings the discussion nearer to the great problem of
the sources of inspiration. It is true that the fact may be
accounted for to some extent by natural causes. Oracles have
never ceased, but the number has been diminished. God
measures His help to men by their needs, and as they grow
more enlightened they feel less need for supernatural guidance.
This, however, is evidently dangerous ground. But surely the
poverty and depopulation of Greece are enough to account for
the disappearance of oracles. A country which can hardly
put three thousand hoplites in the field—as many as Megara
alone sent forth to fight at Plataea—cannot need the many
shrines which flourished when Greece was in its glory.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. viii.</note> But
it may be admitted that oracles can and do disappear. And
this is in no way derogatory to the power of God. For it is
not the great God Himself who utters the warning or the
prophecy by the voice of the priestess. Such a doctrine is
lowering to His greatness and majesty. In prophecy and
divination, as in other fields, God operates, through instruments
and agents, on a given matter, and in concurrence with physical
causes. The matter in this case is the human soul, which, in
greater or less degrees, can be acted on by supernatural influences.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. ix.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εὐηθές γὰρ κομιδῇ τὸ οἴσεθαι τὸν θεὸν αὐτὸν ... ἐνδυόμενον
εἰς τὰ σώματα τὼν προφητὼν ὑποφθέγγεσθαι</foreign>;
c. xlviii.; <hi rend="italic">De Pyth. Or.</hi> c. xxi.</note>
The exciting cause of the <q>enthusiasm</q> or inspiration,
applying a sudden stimulus to the soul, may be some vapour
or exhalation from the earth, such as that which rose from the
cleft beneath the Delphic tripod.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> xlii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ψυχῆς τὸ μαντικὸν ὥσπερ ὄμμα δεῖται τοῦ συνεξάπτοντος
οἰκείου καὶ συνεπιθήγοντος</foreign>.</note> Lastly, there is the daemon,
a supernatural being, who, by his composite nature, as we have
seen, is the channel of sympathy between the human and the
Divine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. x. xii.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">φύσεις εἰσί τινες ἐν μεθορίῳ θεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων,
δεχόμεναι πάθη θνητά, οὗς δαίμονας ὀρθῶς ἔχει κατὰ νόμον
πατέρων σέβεσθαι</foreign>: cf. Plat.
<hi rend="italic">Sympos.</hi> 202 <hi rend="small">E</hi>; Apul. <hi rend="italic">De Deo Socr.</hi>
c. vi.; Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic"><anchor id="corr437"/><corr sic="Diss">Diss.</corr></hi> xiv. §§ 2-8.</note> But among the causes of afflatus or inspiration,
<pb n="438"/><anchor id="Pg438"/>some may, in cases, disappear and cease to operate. The
intoxicating fume or vapour is a force of varying intensity
and may exhaust itself and be spent, as a spring may fail, or
a mine may be worked out.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. xliii.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τῶν δὲ περὶ αὐτὴν (τὴν γῆν) δυνάμεων πῆ μὲν ἐκλείψεις πῆ δὲ γενέσεις ...
εἰκὸς ἐστι συμβαίνειν, κτλ.</foreign></note> The daemon may migrate from
one place to another, and with its disappearance, the oracle
will become silent, as that of Teiresias at Orchomenus has
long been, just as the lyre becomes silent when the musician
ceases to strike the strings.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. xxxviii.; Maury, p. 149.</note>
</p>

<p>
In all this theory Plutarch is careful to guard himself against a
purely materialistic theory of the facts of inspiration.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. xlvi.</note> Physical
causes may assist and predispose, but physical causes alone will
not account for the facts of inspiration. The daemon is a
necessary mediator between the human soul and God, a messenger
of the divine purpose. But the real problem of inspiration
is in the soul of man himself, in the possibility of contact
between the soul and a supernatural power. This question
is illuminated in Apuleius and Plutarch and Maximus of Tyre
by a discussion of the daemon of Socrates. It was by a natural
instinct that the Antonine Platonists went back to the great
teacher of Plato for support of the system which was to link
religion with philosophy by the daemonic theory. In Plutarch’s
dialogue on the Genius of Socrates, the various theories of that
mysterious influence current in antiquity are discussed at length.
The language in which Socrates or his disciples spoke of its monitions
lent itself to different interpretations. Was his daemon
an external sign, as in augury, an audible voice, or an inner,
perhaps supernatural light, a voice of reason, speaking to the
soul’s highest faculty, through no uttered word or symbol?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> c. xi. xx.; cf.
Hild, <hi rend="italic">Étude sur les Démons</hi>, p. 263
sqq.</note>
The grosser conceptions of it may be dismissed at once. The
daemon of Socrates does not belong to the crude materialism
of divination, although the philosopher could forecast the
disaster of Syracuse.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> c. xi.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀκούω δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐν Σικελίᾳ τῆς Ἀθηναίων δυνάμεως φθορὰν
προειπεῖν αὐτόν κτλ.</foreign></note> Nor was it any ordinary faculty of keen
intellectual shrewdness, strengthened and sharpened by the
cultivation of experience. Still less was it any hallucination,
<pb n="439"/><anchor id="Pg439"/>bordering on insanity, which is merely a perversion of the
senses and reason. It was rather a spiritual intuition, an
immediate vision, not darkened or weakened by passing through
any symbolic medium of the senses, a flash of sudden insight
such as is vouchsafed only to the select order of pure and
lofty spirits, in whom from the beginning the higher portion of
the soul has always risen high above the turbid and darkening
influence of the senses.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> c. xx.</note> That such a faculty exists is certain to
the Platonist and the Pythagorean. But in the mass of men it is
struggling against fleshly powers, sometimes defeated, sometimes
victorious, inspiring ideals, or stinging with remorse, until
perchance, late and slowly, after chastisement and struggle, it
emerges into a certain calm. Pythagoreans, such as Apollonius,
taught that the diviner, the mantic, faculty in man was more
open to higher influences when emancipated from the body
in sleep, and that it could be set free in waking hours by
abstinence and ascetic discipline.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. T.</hi> vi. 11.</note> Plutarch laid stress on the
latter part of this theory, but ridiculed the notion that the soul
could be most clear and receptive when its powers were relaxed.
But the capacity of the higher reason in the loftier souls is
almost without limit. The reason, which is the daemon in
each, when unimpeded by bodily obstruction, is open to the
lightest, most ethereal touch. Spirit can act directly by
immediate influence upon spirit, without any sensuous aid of
word or sign.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> c. xx.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">αἱ δὲ τῶν δαιμόνων φέγγος ἔχουσαι τοῖς δυναμένοις ἐλλάμπουσιν,
    οὐ δεόμεναι ῥημάτων οὐδ’ ὀνομάτων κτλ.
    οὕτως οἱ τῶν δαιμόνων λόγοι διὰ πάντων φερόμενοι μόνοις
    ἐνηχούσι τοῖς ἀθόρυβον ἦτος καὶ νήμενον ἔχουσι τὴν ψυχήν·
οὓς δὲ καὶ ἱεροὺς καὶ δαιμονίους ἀνθρώπους καλοῦμεν</foreign>; cf. <hi rend="italic">De
Def. Or.</hi> c. xxxvii.</note> The influence is a <q>wind blowing where it
listeth,</q> or a strange sudden illumination, revealing truth as by
a flash. The disembodied spirit, cleansed and freed from the
servitude of the body, and now a real daemon, possesses all
these powers and receptivities in the fullest measure. But it
gains no new power when it quits the body, although its
spiritual faculties may have been dulled and obstructed by
the flesh. The sun does not lose its native radiance when
for a moment it is obscured by clouds.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. xxxix.</note> And thus a Socrates
may even here below have a spiritual vision denied to us; a
Pythia may be inspired by the daemon of the shrine to read
the future of a campaign. Nor is there anything more
<pb n="440"/><anchor id="Pg440"/>wonderful in prediction than in memory.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. xxxix.</note> In this unresting
flux of existence, the present of brief sensation is a mere
moment between the past which has ceased to be and the
future which is to be born. If we can still grasp the one, may
we not anticipate the other?
</p>

<p>
It is thus that, by a far-reaching theory of inspiration,
Plutarch strove to rehabilitate the faith in oracular lore. The
loftier philosophic conception of the Supreme is saved from
contamination with anything earthly by the doctrine of daemons
themselves released from the body, yet, through the higher
faculty in all souls, able to act directly upon those still in the
flesh. The influence is direct and immediate, yet not independent
of purely physical causes or temperament. <q>The
treasure is in earthen vessels.</q> But the full vision is only
reserved for the spirit unpolluted and untroubled by sense
and passion. Plutarch is preparing the way for the <q>ecstasy</q>
of later Neo-Platonism. All this speculation of course lent
itself to a revival of heathen superstition. Yet it is interesting
to see how, in many a flash of insight, Plutarch reveals a truth
for all generations. We, in our time, are perhaps too much
inclined to limit the powers of the human spirit to the field of
sense and observation. The slackening hold on faith in a
spiritual world and a higher intuition may well be visited by
the proper Nemesis, in the darkening of the divine vision,
whether as religious faith or artistic inspiration. The dream
of an earthly paradise enriched with every sensuous gratification
by a science working in bondage to mere utility may have
serious results for the spiritual future of humanity. It may
need a bitter experience to dispel the gross illusion; yet men
may once more come to believe with Plutarch that, as it were,
at the back of every soul there is an opening to the divine
world from which yet may come, as of old, the touch of an
unseen hand.
</p>

</div></div><div type="book" n="4" rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" level1="Book IV. Adscedentibus di manum porrigunt"/><index index="pdf" level1="Book IV. Adscedentibus di manum porrigunt"/>
<pb n="441"/><anchor id="Pg441"/>

<head>BOOK IV.</head>

<head type="sub"><hi rend="italic">ADSCENDENTIBUS DI MANUM PORRIGUNT</hi></head>

<pb n="442"/><anchor id="Pg442"/>

<div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" level1="I. Superstition"/><index index="pdf" level1="I. Superstition"/>
<pb n="443"/><anchor id="Pg443"/>

<head>CHAPTER I</head>

<head type="sub">SUPERSTITION</head>

<p>
Superstition in all ages is a term of unstable meaning. Men
even of the same time will apply it or deny its application to
the same belief. The devout beliefs of one period may become
mere superstitions to the next. And, conversely, what for a
time may be regarded as alien superstition, may in course of
time become an accepted portion of the native creed. This was
the history of those Eastern cults which will be described in
coming chapters. At first, they fell under Cicero’s definition
of superstition, viz. any religious belief or practice going beyond
the prescription of ancestral usage.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Nat. Deor.</hi> i. 17, 42, §
117; ii. 28, § 70; <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> ii. 72; Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 123; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 23.</note> But a day came when
they were the most popular worships of the Roman world,
when great nobles, and even the prince himself, were enthusiastic
votaries of them.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Com.</hi> c. 9.</note> The religion of Mithra, when it was confined
to an obscure circle of slaves or freedmen at Ostia, was a
superstition to the pontifical college. It took its place with
the cult of the Roman Trinity when Aurelian built his temple
to the Sun and endowed his priesthood.<note place="foot">Vop. <hi rend="italic">Aurelian.</hi> c. 35, § 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch devoted a treatise to the subject of superstition.
And his conception of it is more like our own, less formal and
external, than that of Cicero. He develops his view of the
degradation of the religious sense by contrasting it with
atheism. Atheism is a great calamity, a blindness of the
reason to the goodness and love which govern the universe.
It is the extinction of a faculty rather than the perversion of
one.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Superst.</hi> c. 5, 6,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἡ μὲν ἀθεόθης ἀπάθεια πρὸς τὸ θεῖόν ἐστι ... ἡ δὲ δεισιδαιμονία
    πολυπάθεια κακὸν τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὑπονοοῦσα</foreign>.</note>
<pb n="444"/><anchor id="Pg444"/>But superstition both believes and trembles. It acknowledges
the existence of supernatural powers, but they are to
it powers of evil who are ready to afflict and injure, to be
approached only in terror and with servile prostration. This
craven fear of God fills the whole universe with spectres. It
leaves no refuge whither the devil-worshipper can escape from
the horrors which haunt him night and day. Whither can he
flee from that awful presence? Sleep, which should give a
respite from the cares of life, to his fevered mind, swarms
with ghostly terrors.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Superst.</hi> c. 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μόνη γὰρ οὐ σπένδεται πρὸς τὸν ὕπνον ... εἴδωλα φρικώδη
καὶ τεράστια φάσματα καὶ ποινάς τινας ἐγείρουσα καὶ στροβοῦσα
τὴν ἀθλίαν ψυχήν</foreign>.</note> And death, the last sleep, which
should put a term to the ills of life, only unrolls before the
superstitious votary an awful scene of rivers of fire and blackness
of darkness, and sounds of punishment and unutterable
woe.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 4,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">συνάπτουσα τῷ θανάτῳ κακῶν ἐπίνοιαν ἀθανάτων</foreign>.</note> To such a soul the festivals of ancestral religion lose
all their solemn gladness and cheering comfort. The shrines
which should offer a refuge to the troubled heart, even to the
hunted criminal, become to him places of torture. And the
believer in a God of malignant cruelty betakes himself in
despair to dark rites from foreign lands, and spends his
substance on impostors who trade upon his fears. Better,
says the pious Plutarch, not believe in God at all, than
cringe before a God worse than the worst of men. Unbelief,
calamity though it be, at least does not dishonour a Deity
whose existence it denies. The true impiety is to believe that
God can be wantonly faithless and revengeful, fickle and
cruel.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 6,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">φοβοῦνται τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ καταφεύγουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς θεούς,
    κολακεύουσι καὶ λοιδοροῦσιν</foreign>. Cf. Bacon’s <hi rend="italic">Essays, Of
Superstition</hi>, <q>It were better to have
no opinion of God at all, than such an
opinion as is unworthy of Him.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The earnestness, and even bitterness, with which Plutarch
assails the degrading fear of the supernal Powers have caused
some rather shallow critics to imagine that he had a sympathy
with scepticism.<note place="foot">Gréard, p. 269.</note> How such an idea could arise in the mind
of any one who had read his treatise on the Genius of Socrates
or on Isis and Osiris, or on the Delays of Divine Justice, it is
difficult to imagine. Plutarch’s hatred of superstition is that
of a genuinely pious man, with a lofty conception of the Divine
love and pity, who is revolted by the travesty of pure religion,
<pb n="445"/><anchor id="Pg445"/>which is repeated from age to age. It is the feeling of a man
to whom religion is one of the most elevating joys of life, when
he sees it turned into an instrument of torture. But the
force of the protest shows how rampant was the evil in that
age. Lucretius felt with the intensity of genius all the misery
which perverted conceptions of the Divine nature had inflicted
on human life.<note place="foot">Luc. i. 65; iii. 991; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">De
Div.</hi> ii. 72.</note> But the force of Roman superstition had
endlessly multiplied since the days of Lucretius. It was
no longer the exaggeration of Roman awe at the lightning,
the flight of birds, the entrails of a sacrificial victim, or anxious
observance of the solemn words of ancestral formulae, every
syllable of which had to be guarded from mutilation or omission.
All the lands which had fallen to her sword were, in Plutarch’s
day, adding to the spiritual burden of Rome. If in some cases
they enriched her rather slender spiritual heritage, they
also multiplied the sources of supernatural terror. If in the
mysteries of Isis and Mithra they exalted the soul in
spiritual reverie and gave a promise of a coming life,<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 24.</note> they
sent the Roman matron to bathe in the freezing Tiber at early
dawn and crawl on bleeding knees over the Campus Martius,
or purchase the interpretation of a dream from some diviner of
Palestine or a horoscope from some trader in astral lore.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 523, 547; Mart. vii. 54;
Luc. <hi rend="italic">Philops.</hi> c. 7-13.</note>
The Platonist, nourished on the pure theism of the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi>
and the <hi rend="italic">Republic</hi>, and the priest of that cheerful shrine, which
the young Ion had each bright morning swept with myrtle
boughs and sprinkled with the water of the Castalian spring,<note place="foot">Eurip. <hi rend="italic">Ion</hi>, 104.</note>
whose holy ministry gladdened even the years of boyhood—a
man with such experience had a natural horror of the dark
terrors which threatened to obscure the radiant visions of
Delphi and Olympus.
</p>

<p>
Livy complained of the neglect in his day of signs and
omens which formerly were deemed worthy of historical
record.<note place="foot">Liv. xliii. 13.</note> The contempt for augury in the time of Cicero was
hardly concealed among the cultivated.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> ii. 24.</note> The details of parts
of the ancient bird-lore eluded the researches of the elder
Pliny. The emperor Claudius, lamenting the neglect of the
ancient science, demanded a decree of the Senate to restore it
<pb n="446"/><anchor id="Pg446"/>to its former efficiency.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xi. 15, rettulit deinde
ad senatum super collegio haruspicum,
ne vetustissima Italiae disciplina per
desidiam exolesceret.</note> These are some signs of that general
decay of old Roman religion in the last century of the
Republic, which was partly due to philosophic enlightenment
partly to the confusion and demoralisation of civil strife, but
perhaps even more to the dangerous seductions of foreign
superstitions.<note place="foot">Warde Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>,
p. 343.</note> Among the counsels of Maecenas to Augustus
none is more earnest and weighty than the warning against
these occult arts.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lii. 36,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τοὺς δὲ ξενίζοντάς τι περὶ τὸ θεῖον καὶ μίσει καὶ κόλαζε</foreign>.</note> Augustus is advised to observe, and enforce
the observance of the time-honoured ancestral forms, but he
must banish sorcerers and diviners, who may sow the seeds of
conspiracy against the prince. The advice was acted on.
While the emperor rebuilt the fallen temples and revived the
ancient Latin rites, 2000 books of unlicensed divination were
in one day given to the flames.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xxxi.</note> The old religion, which had
absorbed so much from the augural lore of Etruria,<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Leg.</hi> ii. 9; Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom.
Fest.</hi> p. 233.</note> was itself
certainly not free from superstition. The wrath of the
Lemures,<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Fast.</hi> iii. 285; Lucr. i. 131;
Liv. i. 20.</note> the darkness of the inner forest, the flash of
lightning, the flight of birds, the entrails of a sacrifice, excited
many a fear, and might cause a man to suspend a journey, or
break up an assembly of the people. But the Romans had,
in the early ages, after their orderly legal fashion, reduced the
force of these terrors by an elaborate art which provided a
convenient resource of statecraft, and a means of soothing the
alarms of the crowd.
</p>

<p>
But foreign and unregulated superstitions, from the second
century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, were pouring in from the East to put a fresh load
on the human spirit or to replace the waning faith in Italian
augury. In 139 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> Cornelius Scipio Hispalus vainly strove
by an edict to stop the inroads of the star readers.<note place="foot">Val. Max. i. 3, 3; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">De
Div.</hi> ii. 43.</note> But
treatises on this pretended science were in vogue in Varro’s
time, and are quoted by the great savant with approval.<note place="foot">Aul. Gell. iii. 10.</note>
These impostors were swarming in Rome at the time of
Catiline’s conspiracy,<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">In Catil.</hi> iii. 4; cf. Plut. <hi rend="italic">Vit.
Cic.</hi> c. 17.</note> inflating the hopes of the plotters.
<pb n="447"/><anchor id="Pg447"/>Suetonius has surpassed himself in the collection, from many
sources, of the signs and wonders which foreshadowed the
great destiny, and also the death of Augustus. And it is
noteworthy that, among these predictions, are some founded on
astrology.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xciv. xcvii.</note> On the day of the emperor’s birth, P. Nigidius,
a learned astrologer, found that the position of the stars
foretold a coming master of the world. Augustus himself
received a similar forecast from Theagenes, a star-reader of
Apollonia. He had his horoscope drawn out, and a silver coin
was struck with the stamp of Capricorn.
</p>

<p>
This fatalist superstition infected nearly all the successors
of Augustus in the first and second centuries. Astrology is
essentially a fatalist creed, and the heir to the great prize of
the principate, with the absolute control of the civilised world,
was generally designated by that blind impersonal power
whose decrees might be read in the positions of the eternal
spheres, or by signs and omens upon earth. Suetonius, Tacitus,
Dion Cassius, have chronicled, with apparent faith, the
predictions of future power which gathered round the popular
candidate for the succession, or the dark warnings of coming
disaster which excited the prince’s fears and gave courage
to enemies and rivals. It is not hard to see why the
emperors at once believed in these black arts and profoundly
distrusted their professors. They wished to keep a monopoly
of that awful lore, lest it might excite dangerous hopes in
possible pretenders.<note place="foot">Cf. D. Cass. lxvi. 9,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τούς τε ἀστρολόγους ἐκ τῆς Ῥώμης ἐξώρισεν (Οὐεσπασιανὸς)
    καίτοι πᾶσι τοῖς ἀρίστοις χρώμενος</foreign>.</note> To consult a Chaldaean seer on the fate
of the prince, or to possess his horoscope, was always suspicious,
and might often be fatal.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x. interemit Met.
Pompeianum quod habere imperatoriam
genesin vulgo ferebatur.</note> The astonishing thing is, that men
had such implicit faith in the skill of these Eastern impostors,
along with such distrust of their honesty. They were banished
again and again in the first century, but persecution only
increased their power, and they always returned to exercise
greater influence than ever.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 52; ii. 32, 75; D.
Cass. xlix. 43; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> xiv.</note> Never was there a clearer proof
of the impotence of government in the face of a deep-seated
popular belief.
</p>

<p>
Tiberius, who had probably no real religious faith, was,
<pb n="448"/><anchor id="Pg448"/>from his youth, the slave of astrology.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> lxix., circa deos negligentior
quippe addictus mathematicae,
etc.</note> An adept had, at his
birth, predicted his lofty destiny.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xiv. Yet cf. his love of mythical
<hi rend="italic">nugae</hi>, <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> lxx.</note> He had in his train one
Thrasyllus, a noted professor of the science, who had often to
read the stars in the face of death, and he was surrounded in
his gloomy retirement at Capreae by a <q>Chaldaean herd.</q><note place="foot">Juv. x. 94. See the remarkable
chapters in Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> vi. 21-22.</note>
Claudius was pedantic and antiquarian in his religious tastes,
and, while he tried to revive old Roman augury, he banished
the astrologers.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xii. 52.</note> A great noble who had the temerity to
consult them as to the time of the emperor’s death shared
the same fate. Nero, who despised all regular religion, except
that of the Syrian goddess, was the prey of superstitious terror.
The Furies of the murdered Agrippina, as in Aeschylean
tragedy, haunted him in dreams, and he used the aid of magic
to evoke and propitiate the awful shade.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Ner.</hi> lx.; xxxiv., facto per
magos sacro evocare manes et exorare
tentavit.</note> When, towards
the end of his reign, his prospects grew more threatening, the
appearance of a comet drove him to consult Balbillus, his
astrologer, who advised that the portended danger should be
diverted from the emperor by the destruction of the great
nobles. Some of the craft had predicted that Nero should
one day be deserted and betrayed, while others consoled
him with the promise of a great monarchy of the East with
its seat at Jerusalem.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xl.</note> The terrible year which followed
Nero’s death was crowded with portents, and all the rivals
for the succession were equally slaves of the adepts, who
exploited their ambitions or their fears. The end of Galba
was foreshadowed, from the opening of his reign, by ominous
dreams and signs.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Galb.</hi> xviii.</note> The hopes of Otho had long been inflamed
by the diviner Seleucus,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, iv.</note> and by Ptolemaeus, who
was his companion during his command in Spain.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 22.</note> When
he had won the dangerous prize, Otho was tortured by
nightly visions of the spirit of Galba, which he used every
art to lay. Yet this same man set out for the conflict
on the Po in defiant disregard of omens warranted by
the ancient religion.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, vii. viii.</note> His end, which, by a certain calm
<pb n="449"/><anchor id="Pg449"/>nobility, seemed to redeem his life, was portended by a sign
which Tacitus records as a fact. At the very hour when Otho
was falling on his dagger, a bird of strange form settled in
a much frequented grove, and sat there undisturbed by the
passers-by, or by the flocks of other fowls around.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 50.</note> The horoscope
of Otho’s rival Vitellius had been cast by the astrologers,
and their reading of his fate gave his parents acute anxiety.
He used to follow the monitions of a German sorceress. Yet,
like so many of his class in that age, he had but scant respect
for accredited beliefs. It was noted with alarm that he
entered on his pontificate on the black day of the Allia.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> iii. xi. xiv.</note>
The astrologers he probably found more dangerous than helpful,
and he ordered them to be expelled from Italy.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 62.</note> But it is
a curious sign of their conscious power and their audacity, that
a mocking counter edict to that of Vitellius was immediately
published by unknown hands, ordaining the death of the persecutor
within a certain day.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxv. 1,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀντιπαρήγγειλαν ἀπαλλαγῆναι ἐκ τοῦ βίου ἐντὸς τῆς ἡμέρας κτλ.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
The emperors of the Flavian dynasty, although their power
was stable and the world was settling down, were not less
devoted to Eastern superstitions than any of their predecessors.
Vespasian indeed once more exiled the astrologers, but he
still kept the best of them in his train.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> lxvi. 9, 10.</note> He had consulted
the oracle on Mount Carmel, and obeyed the vision vouchsafed
in the temple of Serapis.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 78.</note> His son Titus, who may have had
romantic dreams of an Eastern monarchy, consulted foreign
oracles, worshipped in Egyptian temples, and was a firm
believer in the science of the stars.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Titus</hi>, v. viii. ix.</note> Domitian was perhaps
the most superstitious of all his race. The rebuilder of
Roman temples and the restorer of Roman orthodoxy had
also a firm faith in planetary lore. He lived in perpetual
fear of his sudden end, the precise hour and manner of which
the Chaldaeans had foretold in his early youth.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> xiv. xv.</note> Among
the many reasons for his savage proscription of the leading
nobles, one of the most deadly was the possession of an
imperial horoscope. On his side too, the haunted tyrant
diligently studied the birth-hour of suspected or possible
<pb n="450"/><anchor id="Pg450"/>pretenders to the throne. In the last months of his reign
his terror became more and more and more intense; never
in the same space of time had the lightning been so busy.
The Capitol, the temple of the Flavians, the palace, even
Domitian’s own sleeping chamber, were all struck from heaven.
In a dream, the haunted emperor beheld Minerva, the
goddess whom he specially adored, quitting her chapel, with
a warning that she could no longer save him from his doom.
On the day before his death, the emperor predicted that, on
the next, the moon would appear blood red in the sign of
Aquarius. On his last morning, a seer, who had been
summoned from Germany to interpret the menacing omens
and who had foretold a coming change, was condemned to
death.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> x. xiv. xv. xvi.; D.
Cass. lxvii. 15,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντως γὰρ καὶ ὁ Δομιτιανὸς τῶν πρώτων τάς τε ἡμέρας
καὶ τὰς ὥρας ἐν αἷς ἐγεγένητο διασκοπῶν ... προανήλισκε</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hadrian, that lover of the exotic and the curious, was
particularly fascinated by the East. He had probably no
settled faith of any kind, but he dabbled in astrology, as he
dabbled in all other arts.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 16; cf. Renan,
<hi rend="italic">L’Égl. Chrét.</hi> c. 2.</note> It was a study which had been cultivated
in his family. His great-uncle, Aelius Hadrianus, was an
adept in the science of the stars, and had read the prediction
of his nephew’s future greatness.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 2, § 4.</note> When the future emperor
was a young military tribune in lower Moesia, he found the
forecast confirmed by a local astrologer. He consulted the
<hi rend="italic">sortes Virgilianae</hi> about his prospects, with not less hopeful
results. He practised with intense curiosity other dark
magical arts, and the mysterious death of Antinous on the
Nile was by many believed to have been an immolation for the
Emperor’s safety.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxix. 11,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μαντείαις μαγγανείαις τε παντοδαπαῖς ἐχρῆτο κτλ.</foreign></note> Hadrian was glad to think that the spirit
of his minion had passed into a new star which had then for
the first time appeared. On every 1st of January, Hadrian
predicted, with perfect assurance, the events of the year, down
to his own last hour.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 16, § 7.</note> Even the last great imperial figure
in our period is not free from the suspicion of having
tampered with the dark arts. Julius Capitolinus reports a
rumour that M. Aurelius consulted the Chaldaeans about
the infatuated passion of Faustina for a gladiator.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">M. Anton.</hi> c. 19.</note> In his
<pb n="451"/><anchor id="Pg451"/>account of the famous rainfall that miraculously refreshed the
Roman troops in the Marcomannic war, D. Cassius ascribes
the miracle to the magic arts of an Egyptian sorcerer whom M.
Aurelius kept in his train.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxxi. 8.</note> Xiphilinus, however, who attributes
the marvel to the prayers of the Thundering Legion, expressly
denies that the emperor gave his countenance to these impostors.
Another suspicious incident comes to us on the authority of
Lucian. When the war on the Danube was at its height,
the new oracle of Alexander of Abonoteichos had, by mingled
audacity and skill, rapidly gained an extraordinary influence
even among the greatest nobles in Italy. Rutilianus, one of
the foremost among them, was its special patron and devotee,
and actually married the daughter of Alexander by an
amour with Selene! Probably through his influence, an
oracle, in verse of the old Delphic pattern, was despatched
to the headquarters of the emperor, ordering that a pair
of lions should be flung into the Danube, with costly sacrifices
and all the fragrant odours of the East.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 35, 47.</note> The oracle was
obeyed, but the rite was followed by an appalling disaster to
the Roman arms. The impostor was equal to the occasion,
and defended himself by the example of the ambiguity of
the Delphic oracle to Croesus, before the victory of Cyrus.
What part M. Aurelius had in this scene we cannot pretend
to tell, but the ceremony could hardly have been performed
without, at least, his connivance. Nor does his philosophic
attitude exclude the possibility of a certain faith in oracular
foresight and divination. He believed that everything in
our earthly lot was ordained from eternity, and, with the
Stoic fatalism, he may have held the almost universal Stoic
faith in the power to discover the decrees of fate.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. x. 5; ix. 27: on the
Stoic belief in divination, <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Cic. <hi rend="italic">De
Div.</hi> i. 38 (82); Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der
Griechen</hi>, iii. 1, p. 313 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nearly all the writers from whom we derive our impressions
of that age were more or less tinged with its superstitions.
Even the elder Pliny, who rejected almost with scorn the
popular religion, was led by a dream to undertake his history
of the wars in Germany.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> iii. 5, § 4.</note> His nephew, although he rejoiced
at being raised to the augurate, and restored a temple of Ceres
on his lands, seems to have clung to the old religion rather
<pb n="452"/><anchor id="Pg452"/>as a matter of sentiment than from any real faith. But he
had a genuine belief in dreams and apparitions, and he sends his
friend Sura an elaborate account of the romance of a haunted
house at Athens.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 27.</note> His friend Suetonius had been disturbed
by a dream as to the success of a cause in which he was to
appear. Pliny consoled him with the hackneyed interpretation
of dreams by contraries.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 18, v. 5, 5; cf. Mayor’s learned
note on iii. 5, 4; Gregorovius, <hi rend="italic">Hadrian</hi>,
p. 229 sqq.</note> The biographer of the Caesars may
contend with Dion Cassius for the honour of being probably
the most superstitious chronicler who ever dealt with great
events. Suetonius is shocked by the arrogance of Julius Caesar
when he treated with disdain the warning of a diviner from
the inspection of a victim’s entrails.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Jul. Caes.</hi> lxxvii.</note> He glorifies the pious
Augustus by a long catalogue of signs and celestial omens
which foretold the events of his career.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> xciii.</note> Suetonius must
have been as keen in collecting these old wives’ tales as the
more sober facts of history,<note place="foot">Cf. Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 59 sqq.</note> and, if we may believe him, the
palace of the Caesars for a hundred years was as full of
supernatural wonders and the terrors of magic and dark
prophecy as the Thessalian villages of Apuleius.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> iv. 27; i. 8; cf. Petron.
<hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 62, 63.</note> The superstitions
of the Claudian and Flavian Caesars could nowhere
have found a more sympathetic chronicler.
</p>

<p>
Immensely superior in genius as Tacitus is to Suetonius,
even he is not emancipated from the superstition of the age.
But he wavers in his superstition, just as he wavers in his
conception of the Divine government of the world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Fabian, <hi rend="italic">Quid Tac. de num. div.
judicaverit</hi>, pp. 7, 13, 16, 21, 24, 29;
Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einleitung</hi>, xiv. xxvi.;
Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> v. 5; ii. 38; <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iii. 18;
vi. 22; xiv. 12; cf. Peter, <hi rend="italic">Die Gesch.
Litt.</hi> ii. p. 221.</note> Although
he occasionally mentions, and briefly discusses, the tenets of the
Epicurean and the Stoic schools, it does not seem probable that
Tacitus had much taste for philosophy. Full of the old senatorial
ideals, he considered such a study, if carried to any depth,
or pursued with absorbing earnestness, to be unbecoming the
gravity and dignity of a man of rank and affairs.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi> c. 2, 4; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 5;
<hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiv. 12.</note> Moreover,
his views of human destiny and the Divine government were
coloured and saddened by the Terror. Having lived himself
through the reign of Domitian, and seen all the horrors of its
<pb n="453"/><anchor id="Pg453"/>close, having witnessed, in humiliating silence, the excesses
of frenzied power and the servility of cringing compliance,
Tacitus had little faith either in Divine benevolence or in
tempted human virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi> c. 45; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 2; iii. 37;
<hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 7.</note> Even the quiet and security of
Trajan’s reign seemed to him but a precarious interval, not to
be too eagerly or confidently enjoyed, between the terror of
the past and the probable dangers of a coming age.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 1.</note> The
corruption of Roman virtue has justly earned the anger of
gods, who no longer visit to protect, but only to avenge.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 3 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note>
And, in the chaos of human affairs, the Divine justice is
confused; the good suffer equally with the guilty.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xvi. 33, aequitate deum erga
bona malaque documenta.</note> Amid
obscure and guarded utterances, we can divine that, to Tacitus,
the ruling force in human fortunes is a destiny which is blind
to the deserts of those who are its sport.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 22; cf. Mackail, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Lit.</hi>
p. 210.</note> He probably held
the widespread belief that the fate of each man was fixed
for him at his birth, and, although he has a profound scorn for
the venality and falsehood of the Chaldaean tribe, he probably
had a wavering faith in the efficacy of their lore.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 22, genus hominum
potentibus infidum sperantibus fallax,
quod in civitate nostra et vetabitur semper
et retinebitur; cf. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> v. 4; <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi>
vi. 28; iv. 58; cf. Fabian, p. 19.</note> Nor did
he reject miracle and supernatural portent on any ground of a
scientific conception of the universe.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 50.</note> His language on such
subjects is often perhaps studiously ambiguous. Sometimes he
appears to report the tale of a portent, as a mere piece of vulgar
superstition. But at other times, he records the marvel with
no expression of scepticism.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 81; cf. Nipperdey, <hi rend="italic">Einl.</hi>
xxvi.</note> And in his narrative of Otho’s
death and the miracles of Vespasian, the threats of heaven
which ushered in Galba’s brief reign in darkness broken by
lurid lightnings, the neglected signs of the coming doom of
Jerusalem, the glare of arms from contending armies in the
sky, the ghostly voices, as of gods departing from the Holy of
Holies, as in the tale of many another omen, dream, or oracle,
the historian gives an awe and grandeur to a superstition which
he does not explicitly reject.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 50; iv. 81; i. 6; i. 18;
v. 13; <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> i. 65; ii. 14; <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii.
56; iv. 83; cf. Fabian, <hi rend="italic">Quid Tac. de
num. div. judicaverit</hi>, p. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nor need we be superciliously surprised that the greatest
<pb n="454"/><anchor id="Pg454"/>master of historic tragedy, born into such an age, should have
had the balance of his faith disturbed. His infancy and boyhood
coincided with the last years of Nero.<note place="foot">Peter, <hi rend="italic">Gesch. Litt.</hi> ii. p. 42.</note> His youthful
imagination must have been disordered and inflamed by the
tales, circulating in grave old Senatorial houses, of wild excess
or mysterious crime on the Palatine, the daring caprice of
imperial harlots, the regal power and fabulous wealth and
luxury of the imperial freedmen, the lunacy of the great line
which had founded the Empire, and which seemed destined to
end it in shame and universal ruin. That the destinies of the
world should be at the mercy of a Pallas, a Caligula, or an
Agrippina was a cruel trial to any faith. The carnival of lust
and carnage in which the dynasty disappeared,<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 83, simul cruor et
strues corporum, juxta scorta et scortis similes, etc.</note> the shock of
the fierce struggle on the Po, in which the legions of the East
and the West fought with demoniac force for the great prize,
deepened the horrors of the tragedy and the gloomy doubts of
its future historian. The dawn of a timorous hope, which broke
under the calm, strong rule of Vespasian, was overcast, during
the early manhood of Tacitus, by the old insanity of power which
seemed to revive in the last of the Flavians. Such an experience
and such an atmosphere were enough to disorder any imagination.
The wild Titanic ambition in the Claudian Caesars, a
strange mixture of vicious, hereditary insanity,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. iv. vi.</note> with a fevered
imagination which, intoxicated with almost superhuman power,
dreamt of unheard of conquests over nature, made the Julio-Claudian
emperors, in the eyes of men, a race half-fiend, half-god.
Men hated and loathed them, yet were ready to deify
them. It did not seem unnatural that Caligula should throw
a gigantic arch over the Forum, to link the imperial palace
with the temple of Jupiter on the Capitol.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> xxi. xxii. xxix. xxxiv.
xxxvii.; cf. Mackail, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Lit.</hi> p. 213.</note> Men long refused
to believe in the death of Nero, and his reappearance was
expected for generations.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, lvii.</note> In spite of the Augustan revival,
the calm, if rather formal, sanity of old Roman religion had
lost its power over cultivated minds. The East, with its
fatalist superstitions, its apotheosis of lofty earthly sovereignty,
its enthronement of an evil power beside the good, was
completing the overthrow of the national faith. The air was
<pb n="455"/><anchor id="Pg455"/>full of the lawless and the supernatural. Science, in the
modern sense, was yet unborn; it was a mere rudimentary
mass of random guesses, with as little right to command the
reason as the legends which sprang from the same lawless
imagination. Philosophic speculation in any high sense had
almost disappeared. The most powerful system which still
lingered, resolved the gods into mere names for the various
potencies of that dim and awful Power which thrills through
the universe, which fixes from the beginning the destinies of
men and nations, and which deigns to shadow forth its
decrees in omen or oracle. Awestruck and helpless in the
face of a cruel and omnipresent despotism, with little light from
accredited systems of philosophy or religion, what wonder that
even the highest and most cultivated minds were darkened
and bewildered, and were even ready to lend an ear to the
sorcery of the mysterious East? The hesitating acceptance
of the popular belief in clairvoyance hardly surprises us in a
man like Tacitus, bewildered by the chaos of the Empire, and
possessing few reasoned convictions in religion or philosophy.
It is more surprising to find so detached a mind as Epictetus
recognising in some sort the power of divination. He admits
that men are driven to practise it by cowardice or selfish
greed.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> ii. 7, § 10,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τί οὖν ἡμᾶς ἐπὶ τὸ συνεχῶς μαντεύεσθαι ἄγει; Ἡ δειλία, τὸ
    φοβεῖσθαι τὰς ἐκβάσεις</foreign>.</note> He agrees that the diviner can only predict the
external changes of fortune, and that on their moral bearing,
on the question whether they are really good or evil, he can
throw no light. Yet even this preacher of a universal
Providence, of the doctrine that our true good and happiness
are in our own hands, will not altogether deny that the augur
can forecast the future. We should, indeed, Epictetus says,
come to consult him, without any selfish passion, as a wayfarer
asks of a man whom he meets which of two roads leads to
his journey’s end.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi>
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὡς ὁ ὁδοιπόρος πυνθάνεται ... ποτέρα τῶν ὁδῶν φέρει ...
    οὕτως ἔδει καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν θεὸν ἔρχεσθαι, ὡς ὁδηγόν</foreign>.
Cf. <hi rend="italic">Ench.</hi> 32.</note> But the field for such guidance is limited,
Where the light of reason or conscience is a sufficient guide,
the diviner’s art is either useless or corrupting. Nor should
any ominous signs deter a man from sharing a friend’s peril,
even though the diviner may give warning of exile or death.
</p>

<p>
Next to Aristides, there is probably no writer who reveals
<pb n="456"/><anchor id="Pg456"/>so strikingly the mingled pietism and superstition of the time
as Aelian. Although he preferred to compose his works in
Greek, he was a native of the Latian Praeneste, that cool
retreat of the wearied Roman, and the seat of the famous
shrine of Fortuna Primigenia.<note place="foot">Warde Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Roman Festivals</hi>,
p. 72; Preller, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Myth.</hi> (Tr.), p. 381.</note> It is a disputed point whether
Aelian belongs to the second century or the third. But the
more probable conclusion, favoured by the authority of Suidas,
is that he lived shortly after the time of Hadrian.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. p. 273,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐθαύμαζε δὲ τὸν Ἡρώδην ὡς ποικιλώτατον ῥητόρων</foreign>: cf. <hi rend="italic">Praef. Jac. Perizonii
ed. Aeliana</hi>, Gronov.; Suid.
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ ἐσοφίστευσεν ἐν Ῥώμῃ αὐτῇ ἐπὶ τῶν μετὰ Ἁδριανὸν χρόνων</foreign>.</note> His
historical Miscellanies are a good example of that uncritical
treatment of history and love of the sensational which were
held up to scorn by Lucian.<note place="foot">Ael. <hi rend="italic">Var. Hist.</hi> xi. 13.</note> But it is in the fragments of
his work on Providence, that we have the best illustration of
his religious attitude. The immediate interference of the
Heavenly Powers, to reward the pious believer, or to punish the
defiant sceptic, is triumphantly proclaimed. Miracles, oracles,
presages, and warning dreams startle the reader on every page.
Aelian wages war <hi rend="italic">à outrance</hi> with the effeminate and profane
crew of the Epicureans, whom he would certainly have handed
over pitilessly to the secular arm, if he had had the power.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Fragm. Ael. ap. Gronov.</hi> p.
1014.</note>
He records with delight the physical maladies which are said
to have afflicted Epicurus and his brothers, and the persecution
of their sect at Messene and in Crete.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1022.</note> After the tale of some
specially impressive interference of Providence, he launches
ferocious anathemas at the most famous sceptics, Xenophanes,
Diagoras, and Epicurus.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1024.</note> He pursues Epicurus even to the
tomb, and pours all his scorn on the unbelieving voluptuary’s
arrangements for biennial banquets to his shade.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1023.</note> He exults
in the fate of one who, without initiation, tried to get a sight
of the holy spectacle at Eleusis, and perished by falling from
his secret point of observation.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1011.</note> It is needless to say that
miraculous cures by Asclepius are related with the most
exuberant faith. Aristarchus the tragic poet, and Theopompus
the comedian, were restored from wasting and hopeless sickness
by the god.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1030.</note> Another patient of the shrine had the vision, which
<pb n="457"/><anchor id="Pg457"/>was probably often a real fact, of a priest standing beside his
bed in the night, bringing counsels of healing.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Fragm. Ael.</hi> pp. 1009, 1034.</note> But the
climax of ludicrous credulity is reached in the tale of the
pious cock of Tanagra.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1013.</note> This favoured bird, being maimed in
one leg, appeared before the shrine of Asclepius, holding out
the injured limb, and, taking his place in the choir that sung
the morning paean, begged the god for relief and healing. It
came before the evening, and the grateful bird, with crest
erect, with stately tread, and flapping wings, gave voice to his
deliverance in his own peculiar notes of praise! The Divine
vengeance is also displayed asserting itself in dreams. A
traveller, stopping for the night at Megara, had been murdered
for his purse of gold by the keeper of his inn, and his corpse,
hidden in a dung-cart, was carried through the gates before
dawn. At that very hour his wraith appeared to a citizen
of the place, and told him the tale of the tragedy. The
treacherous assassin was caught at the very point indicated
by the ghost.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 1049.</note> The last dream of Philemon is of a more
pleasing kind.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi>
    <anchor id="corr457"/><corr sic="(missing)">p.</corr> 1051.</note> The poet, being then in his full vigour, and
in possession of all his powers, once had a vision in his home
at Peiraeus. He thought he saw nine maidens leaving the
house, and heard them bidding him adieu. When he awoke,
he told the tale to his boy, and finished the play on which he
was at work; then, wrapping himself in his cloak, he lay down
to sleep, and when they came to wake him, he was dead.
Aelian challenges Epicurus to deny that the maidens of the
vision were the nine Muses, quitting an abode which was soon
to be polluted by death.
</p>

<p>
Publius Aelius Aristides is one of the best representatives
of the union of high culture with the forces of the religious
revival. He saw the beginning and the end of the Antonine
age. He was born in 117 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> at Adriani, in Mysia, where his
family held a high position, his father being priest of Zeus.
He received the most complete rhetorical training, and had been
a pupil of Herodes Atticus. Travelling through Greece, Italy,
and Egypt, and giving exhibitions of his skill in the fashion
of the day,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Jebb’s <hi rend="italic">Aristides</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Collect. Hist.</hi>
§ vi.</note> Aristides won a splendid reputation, which swelled
<pb n="458"/><anchor id="Pg458"/>his vanity to proportions rare even in a class whose vanity
was proverbial. He won the restoration of the ruined Smyrna
from M. Aurelius, by an oration which moved the Emperor to
tears.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Soph.</hi> ii. p. 253.</note> With a naturally feeble constitution and epileptic
tendencies, the excitement of the sophist’s life brought on an
illness which lasted thirteen years. During that long ordeal,
he developed a mystic superstition which, along with an ever-growing
self-consciousness, inspired the <hi rend="italic">Sacred Orations</hi>, which
appeared in 177, long after his health had been restored. He
visited many seats of sacred healing—Smyrna, Pergamum,
Cyzicus, Epidaurus—and, often in a cataleptic state, between
sleep and waking, he had visitations of the Higher Powers in
dreams. They gave him prescriptions of the strangest remedies,
along with eulogies on his unrivalled talent, which he was
solemnly enjoined to devote to the celebration of his deliverance
by the Divine favour.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p. 440 sqq.;
Baumgart, <hi rend="italic">Ael. Aristides als Repräsentant
der Soph. Rhet.</hi> pp. 68, 96.</note>
</p>

<p>
Aristides zealously obeyed the Divine command. But
whether his sole inspiration was simple gratitude and unsophisticated
piety, crossed by superstition, as has generally
been assumed, may well be doubted.<note place="foot">Baumgart rejects Welcker’s view of
the essentially religious character of
Aristides, pp. 112, 113.</note> The truth is, that in
Aristides met all the complex influences of his age, both
intellectual and spiritual. He was the most elaborate product
of the rhetorical school, with its cultivated mastery of phrase,
its exuberant pride in the power of words, its indifference to
truth, in comparison with rhetorical effect. The whole force of
revived Hellenism was concentrated in this declamatory skill.<note place="foot">Baumgart, pp. 62, 102, Bald ist in
der ganzen Heilungsgeschichte dies die
Hauptsache, dass nun sein Rhetorentum
die höchste Weihe erhalten habe.</note>
At the same time, the religious revival was very far from being
a return to the old religion, in its clear firm outlines and
simple wholeness.<note place="foot">Id. p. 62.</note> The Zeus and Athene and Poseidon of the
age of Aristides were not the divinities of the great age.
Many influences had been at work to blur the clean-cut outlines
of Hellenic imagination, and to sophisticate the ancestral
faith both of Greece and Rome. Men wished to believe in
the ancient gods, but they were no longer the gods of Homer
or of Aeschylus, the gods worshipped by the men who fought
<pb n="459"/><anchor id="Pg459"/>in the Samnite or the Punic wars. Greek philosophy for eight
centuries had been teaching a doctrine of one Divine force or
essence, transcending the powers and limitations of sense, or
immanent in the fleeting world of chance and change. Pagan
theology had elaborated a celestial hierarchy, in which the
Deity, removed to an infinite distance, was remotely linked to
humanity by a graduated scale of inferior spiritual beings,
daemons, and heroes.<note place="foot">Baumgart, pp. 60, 61.</note> Then came the religions of the East,
with their doctrines of expiation for sin and ascetic preparation
for communion, and visions of immortality. And, alongside
of all these developments, there was a portentous growth of
vulgar superstition, belief in dreams, omens, and oracles, in
any avenue to the <q>Great Mystery.</q> Sophistic rhetoric, from
its very nature and function, was bound to reflect the religious
spirit of the age, in all its confusion. The ancient myths,
indeed, were revived and decked out with rich poetic colouring.
Yet it is not the simple, naïve, old pagan faith which inspires
the rhetorical artist. The pantheistic or theosophist doctrines,
which were in the air, disturbed the antique character of the
<anchor id="corr459"/><corr sic="piece">piece.</corr><note place="foot">Id. p. 64.</note> But the sophist, if he occasionally catches the tone
of new mysticism, or even of rationalist interpretation, is
nothing if not orthodox on the whole, and he anathematises
the impiety of free-thinking philosophy, with the same energy
as Aelian. Above all, Aristides is in harmony with the infinite
faith in miracle and heavenly vision which was rife.
</p>

<p>
From whatever cause, the worship of Asclepius had
attained an extraordinary popularity in the age of the Antonines.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> c. iii. of Pater’s <hi rend="italic">Marius the
Epicurean</hi>.</note>
The conditions of health and disease are so obscure,
the influences of will and imagination on our bodily states
are so marked, that, in all ages, the boundaries between the
natural and the unknowable are blurred and may be easily
crossed. The science of medicine, even down to the age of
Hippocrates, or the age of Galen, had not abandoned all faith
in the magical and mysterious.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iii. 44; D.
Cass. lxix. 22,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἁδριανὸς δὲ μαγγανείαις μέν τισι καὶ γοητείαις ἐκενοῦτό ποτε
τοῦ ὑγροῦ</foreign>.</note> Incantations long held their
ground beside more scientific remedies. Health being the
most precious and the most precarious of earthly blessings, it
is not strange that, in an age of revived belief in the
super<pb n="460"/><anchor id="Pg460"/>natural, the god of health should attain a rank even on
level with the great Olympian gods. His temples rose in every
land where Greek or Roman culture prevailed. They were
generally built with an eye to beauty of scenery, or the virtues
of some clear, cold, ancient spring, or other health-giving
powers in the site, which might reinforce the more mysterious
influences of religion. And in every temple there was a
hierarchy of sacred servants, who guarded a tradition of
hieratic ceremonial and of medical science.<note place="foot">Caton, <hi rend="italic">Temples and Ritual of
Asklepios</hi>, p. 27.</note> There was the
chief priest, who may or may not have been a trained physician.
There were the <hi rend="italic">daduchi</hi> and <hi rend="italic">pyrophori</hi>, who attended to the
punctual service of the altars. There were the <hi rend="italic">neocori</hi>,
who were probably physicians, and who waited on the
patients, interpreting their visions, and often supplementing
them by other visions of their own.<note place="foot">Baumgart, p. 97; cf. Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
p. 574 (Jebb’s Ed.), 531.</note> There were also, in a
lower rank, nurses, male and female, who, if we may judge
from Aristides, performed the sympathetic part of our own
hospital-nurses.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> p. 530 (Jebb).</note> The patients came from all parts of the
Graeco-Roman world. After certain offerings and rites, the
sufferer took his place in the long dormitory, which often contained
beds for 200 or 300, with windows open all night
long to the winds of the south. The sick man brought his
bed-coverings, and made his gift on the altar. The lamps were
lighted in the long gallery, a priest recited the vesper prayers.
At a later hour, the lights were extinguished, strict silence was
enjoined, and a hope for some soothing vision from above was
left as a parting gift or salutation by the minister as he
retired.<note place="foot">Caton, p. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
Divination by dreams was one of the most ancient and
universal of superstitions in the pagan world.<note place="foot">Maury, <hi rend="italic">La Magie</hi>, p. 231.</note> It was also one
of the most persistent to the last days of paganism in the West.
The god of Epidaurus was still visiting his votaries by night,
when S. Jerome was composing his commentary on Isaiah.<note place="foot">S. Hieron. in <hi rend="italic">Is.</hi> c. lv. p. 482.</note>
Nor is the superstition unnatural. Sleep, the most mysterious
of physical phenomena, gives birth to mental states which are
a constant surprise. Thoughts and powers which are latent
in the waking hours, then start into life with a strange
vivid<pb n="461"/><anchor id="Pg461"/>ness and energy. Memory and imagination operate with a
force which may well, in an age of faith, be taken for inspiration.
The illusion of a double personality, which results from
the helplessness of the mind to react on the impressions of
sense, also easily passes into the illusion of messages and
promptings from powers beyond ourselves. Religious hopes
and cravings may thus easily and honestly seem to be fulfilled.
</p>

<p>
But external causes also reinforced in the ancient world
the deceptions of the inner spirit. The dream-oracle was
generally on a site where nature might touch the awe and
imagination of the votary. Few could have descended into the
gloom of the cave of Trophonius without having their fancy
prepared for visions.<note place="foot">Pausan. ix. 39, § 4; Max. Tyr.
<hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiv. 2.</note> Exhalations from secret chasms, as at
Delphi and Lebadea, aided by the weird spells of the Nymphs
who haunted such scenes, often produced a physical excitement
akin to madness. Opiates and potions administered by
the priests, with the effect of solemn religious rites, prepared
the votary for voices from another world.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. 41-46; Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 8; cf. Maury, <hi rend="italic">La
Magie</hi>, p. 237.</note> Soul and body
were still further prepared for the touch of a Divine hand by
rigorous fasting, which was enjoined as a preparatory discipline
in so many mysteries of the renascent paganism.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 22.</note> The
heavenly vision could only come to the clear spirit, purged as
far as might be from the grossness of the flesh.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. xvi. i.; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
Tyan.</hi> ii. 37; vi. 11.</note>
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἐγκοίμησις</foreign>
for the sake of healing became a great, and probably in the
main, a beneficent institution in the temples of many deities,<note place="foot">See a list in Tertullian, <hi rend="italic">De Anima</hi>,
c. 46.</note> pre-eminently
in those of Isis, Serapis, and Asclepius. The temple
of Serapis at Canopus in Strabo’s time was thronged by patients
of the noblest rank, and was famous for its miraculous cures.<note place="foot">Strab. xvii. 17 (1052).</note>
Among the many attributes of Queen Isis, none made a deeper
impression than her benignant power of healing even the most
desperate cases.<note place="foot">Diod. Sic. i. 25.</note> Her temples rose everywhere. Her dream
interpreters were famous from the days of Cicero.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> i. 58.</note> In her
shrine at Smyrna Aristides had many of his most startling
experiences. According to Diodorus, her priests could point
to numberless proofs of the power of the great goddess to cure
<pb n="462"/><anchor id="Pg462"/>the most inveterate disease. But the great healer was, of
course, Asclepius. The remains of his splendid shrine at
Epidaurus are a revelation at once of his fame and power,
and of the scenes and occupations in which the devout health-seekers
passed their days and nights. In his temple on the
island in the Tiber, dreams of healing were still sought in the
time of Iamblichus. His shrine at Pergamum, which was
the scene of so many of the strange visions of Aristides, in
his many years of struggle with disease, was one of the most
famous, and its inspired dreams were sought long afterwards
by the emperor Caracalla.<note place="foot">Wolff, <hi rend="italic">De Nov. Orac. Aet.</hi> p. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
It would be idle to speculate on the relative effects of
sound medical treatment and of superstition, stimulated by
more or less pious arts, upon the constitution of the sufferer.
The virtues of herb or mineral drug, of regulated food and
abstinence, of bathing in naturally medicated waters, above
all of a continual freshness in the air, must have become a
tradition in these sacred homes of the god of health. Physical
disease is often rooted in moral disorder, and for such troubled,
tainted souls, with hereditary poison in vein and nerve, the
bright cheerfulness, the orderly calm and confidence of the
ritual, which had such a charm for the soul of Plutarch, may
have exorcised, for the time, many an evil spirit, and wiped
out the memory of old sins. Soothed and relieved in mind
and body, the sufferer lay in the dimly lighted corridor,
sinking to sleep, with a confidence that the god would somehow
make his power felt in visions of the night.<note place="foot">Caton, p. 28.</note> Through
a sliding panel, hidden in the wall, a dim figure of gracious
aspect might glide to the side of his couch, and whisper
strange sweet words of comfort. But in many cases, there is
no need to assume the existence of sanctified imposture.<note place="foot">Diod. Sic. i. 25.</note> A
debilitated frame, nerves shattered by prolonged suffering, an
imagination excited by sacred litany, ghostly counsels and tales
of miracle, the all-pervading atmosphere of an immemorial
faith, may easily have engendered visions which seemed to
come from another world.<note place="foot">Wolff, <hi rend="italic">De Nov. Orac. Aet.</hi> p. 31,
Ejus sacerdotes fraudibus famosi opportune
Isidis templo Pompeiano culpae
convicti sunt; ubi ipse scalinam vidi
secretam, etc. Maury, <hi rend="italic">La Magie</hi>, pp.
237-8.</note>
</p>

<pb n="463"/><anchor id="Pg463"/>

<p>
But from whatever source the visions came, they had a
powerful effect on the imagination, and, through that, on the
bodily health. Some of the prescriptions indeed given by
these voices of the night may seem to us ludicrous or
positively dangerous.<note place="foot">Cf. Maury, p. 240.</note> But the tone and surroundings of
these shrines, and the sense of being encompassed by Divine
as well as human sympathy, probably counteracted any ill
effects of quackery. The calm, serene order, which the
hieratic spirit cultivates at its best, the cheerful routine of
the sacred service, blending indistinguishably with the ministry
to suffering, and consecrating and ennobling it, the confidence
inspired by the sedate cheerfulness of the priests and attendants,
reinforced by the countless cases of miraculous cures
recorded on the walls,<note place="foot">See a list in Caton, p. 36 sq.</note>—all this must have had a powerful
and beneficent influence. And the visitors were not all
invalids. The games and festivals drew together many merely
for society and amusement. The theatre at Epidaurus
must have provided constant entertainment for a far larger
concourse than the patients of the temple.<note place="foot">Caton, p. 28; Pausan. ii. 27, § 5;
cf. Strab. viii. 6, § 15.</note> A healthy
regimen, which is abundantly attested,<note place="foot">Caton, pp. 40, 38.</note> with the charms
of art and surrounding beauties of hill and woodland, tended
of themselves to restore peace and balance to disordered
nerves. And the social life, especially to Greeks, was
probably the most potent influence of all. We can see from
Aristides that troublesome cases were watched by a circle of
curious sympathisers.<note place="foot">Baumgart, p. 101.</note> In those marble seats, which can still
be seen on the site, many a group, through many generations,
must have sat listening to music or recitation, or discussing
high themes of life and death, or amused with the more trivial
gossip of all gatherings of men.
</p>

<p>
Amid such scenes Aristides spent thirteen years of the
prime of his manhood. With all the egotism of the self-pitying
invalid, he has recorded the minutest details of his
ailments. He seems to have been disordered in every organ,
dropsical, asthmatic, dyspeptic, with a tumour of portentous
size, and agonising pains which reduced him to the extremity
of weakness.<note place="foot">Cf. Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 536-538 (Jebb, t. i.).</note> But the extraordinary toughness and vitality
<pb n="464"/><anchor id="Pg464"/>of the man is even more striking than his sufferings. Aristides
regarded health as the greatest of all blessings, the condition
on which the value of all other blessings depends. And he
acted on the belief. His hundred days journey to Rome is
a miracle of endurance.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 537,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἕβρος πᾶς ἠπείρωτο ὑπὸ κριστάλλου, πεδία δὲ λιμνάζοντα</foreign>.</note> Racked with fever and asthma,
unable to take any food except milk, he struggled along, alternately
through plains turned into lakes, or across the frozen
Hebrus, amid storm or rain or freezing cold.
</p>

<p>
The effects of this journey in aggravated suffering from
asthma, dropsy, nervous agony, are described with painful
vividness. They were dealt with by the Roman surgeons in a
fashion which makes one wonder how the patient survived such
laceration.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 538,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ τέλος, οἱ ἰατροὶ κατέτεμνον ἐκ τοῦ στήθους ἀρξάμενοι πάντα
    ἑξῆς ἄχρι πρὸς τὴν κύστιν κατω. κτλ.</foreign></note> The invalid hastened home to Asia by sea. The
voyage was long and weary, a very Odyssey of storm and
wandering. Aristides reached Smyrna in mid-winter, and all
the physicians were puzzled to find any alleviation for his
troubles.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 541,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὔτε βοηθεῖν εἴχον οὔτε ἐγνώριζον τὴν ποικιλίαν τῆς νόσου.
    τοσοῦτον δ’ οὖν συνέδοξεν εἰς τὰς πηγὰς τὰς θερμὰς κομίσαι.</foreign> Cf. 514,
        <anchor id="corr464"/><corr sic="κτλ"><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">κτλ.</foreign></corr>, and <hi rend="italic">Collect.
Hist. ad an.</hi> 160, in Jebb’s Ed.</note> Henceforth he passed, for thirteen years, from
one temple to another, at the bidding of the gods—from
Smyrna to Pergamum, or Chios, or Cyzicus, or Epidaurus—enduring
often frightful hardships by land or sea. The
description of his sufferings sometimes excites the suspicion
that a warm imagination and the vanity of the literary artist
have heightened the effect. A tumour of monstrous size,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 504.</note>
agonies of palpitation and breathlessness, the torture of
dyspepsia, vertigo, and neuralgia which doubled up his limbs,
and seemed to bend the spine outward like a bow<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 554,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ δὲ στῆθος ἔξω παρεωθεῖτο καὶ τὸ νῶτον εἰς τοὔπισθεν ἀντεσπᾶτο
ἠρέμει δὲ οὐδὲν τοῦ σώματος, κτλ.</foreign></note>—these
are only a few of the morbid horrors which afflicted him.
</p>

<p>
The divine prescriptions were often as astounding as the
malady was severe. Fresh air, exercise, bathing in the sacred
wells, fasting and abstinence, indeed, may often have been
sound treatment. But to these were added astonishing
prescriptions of food or drugs, purgings and blood-letting
which drained the body of its slight remaining strength, and
which horrified the attendant physicians.<note place="foot">Arist. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 501-3, 506, 531, 532.</note> But these were
<pb n="465"/><anchor id="Pg465"/>not the worst. Again and again, Aristides was enjoined, when
in a high fever, to bathe two or three times in an ice-cold
river running in full flood, and then race a mile at full speed
in the face of a northerly gale. He obeyed in spite of all
remonstrance, and the doctors and his anxious friends could
only follow him to await the result of such extraordinary
remedies. Strange to relate, their fears and forebodings
proved groundless. Religious excitement, combined with
immense vanity and a strange vitality, carried Aristides
victoriously through these ordeals,<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 521.</note> and his friends received
him at their close, with an indescribable genial warmth spreading
through his whole body, and a lightness and cheerfulness
of spirit which more than rewarded him for these strange
hardships of superstition.
</p>

<p>
The faith of Aristides must have been very robust. His
tortures lasted for nearly thirteen years, during which the
divine prescriptions only seemed to add to their poignancy.
But he was upheld by the belief that he was a special object
of the Divine favour, and he persistently followed Divine
recipes, which ordinary human skill and prudence would have
rejected. No doubts, such as troubled his attendants, ever crossed
his mind. How far his illness was prolonged by this obstinate
adherence to the illusions of sleep and superstition,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 504-5, 541-2.</note> in the
face of expert advice, is a matter on which it would be useless
to speculate. It is probable that the imagination and exuberant
vanity of Aristides made him a more difficult patient
than the ordinary people who frequented these shrines of
healing. It is also evident that there was a body of more or
less skilled medical opinion connected with the cult of Asclepius.
Practical physicians came to the temples,<note place="foot">Baumgart, p. 101; Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> p.
550 (Jebb, t. i.).</note> with the benevolence
and the curiosity of their craft in all ages, to observe and study,
or to advise a cautious interpretation of the revelations of the
night. Aristides has preserved the names of some—Theodotus,
Asclepiacus, and Satyrus. Long observation of the freaks of
individual temperament and constitution must have suggested
to thoughtful minds, with some instincts of scientific method,
that the supernatural vision should be interpreted in the light
of experience. An awful dream of Aristides that all his bones
<pb n="466"/><anchor id="Pg466"/>and sinews must be excised, turned, in the hands of a faithful
attendant, into a prediction of renewed vitality.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 553; Baumgart, p. 99.</note> And although
some of the nurses, to whom he is so grateful, confirmed his
visions by precisely similar revelations of their own,<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 506, 515; cf. Baumgart,
p. 122.</note> others, of
the more skilled physicians, openly blamed his too confident
reliance on his dreams, and his unwillingness to try the effect
of more scientific treatment.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 505,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἱ δὲ ἐνεκάλουν ὡς λίαν ἅπαντα ἐπὶ τοῖς ὀνείρασι ποιουμένῳ, κτλ.</foreign></note> Their proposals, however, were
sometimes so severe and heroic that we may excuse him for
preferring on the whole the more patient and gentle methods
of the god. The sufferer was sometimes favoured with
epiphanies of Athene, Apollo, Serapis, and other great
divinities, exalting him far above the rank of common votaries.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 529.</note>
And Asclepius himself, to whom his special devotion was
given, not only lightened his physical tortures, although after
long years, but endowed him with hitherto unknown powers
of rhetorical skill and readiness. The god became the patron
of his whole professional life.<note place="foot">Baumgart, p. 64, und dabei entwickelte
sich der Glaube, dass er dem
Asklepios alles verdanke, Leib, Leben,
und speciell die Gabe der Rede, etc.; cf.
p. 68, erhebt er ihn auch als den eigentlichen
Verleiher und Spender seiner
rednerischen Gaben, etc., p. 69, er dem
Gotte einen stärkeren und bleibenden
Einfluss auch auf die Gestaltung seines
inneren Lebens zuschreibt.</note> And Aristides regarded him
as the source of fresh inspiration, in the exercise of that wordcraft
of which he was the greatest master in his time. It is
not hard to discern the meaning of this self-deception. Before
Aristides began to visit the temples of the god, he was already
a finished rhetor, possessed of all the skill which the Greek
schools could impart.<note place="foot">Id. p. 69.</note> Prostrated by bodily suffering for years,
cut off from that life of brilliant display, which was so lavishly
rewarded by applauding crowds, the vain and ambitious
declaimer had lost not only his bodily health, but all the joy
and excitement of rhetorical triumph. Suddenly he found his
balance restored; the tide of energy returned to its old channels.
He could once more draw music from the almost forgotten
instrument. He had once more the full lecture-hall under his
spell. What wonder that he should feel his powers redoubled
when they were recovered, and that he should regard the god
who had healed his bodily ailments as the author of a fresh
literary inspiration?
</p>

<pb n="467"/><anchor id="Pg467"/>

<p>
The debt was repaid in these Sacred Orations.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 512,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς προεῖπεν ὁ θεὸς ἀπογράφειν τὰ ὀνείρατα</foreign>.</note> Some treat
them as the expression of a genuine mystical piety, others are
inclined to think that the incorrigible rhetorician is quite as
evident as the pious votary.<note place="foot">Baumgart, pp. 112, 123.</note> It would be an excess of
scepticism to doubt that Aristides believed in his visions, and
in the beneficent power of the god, for which he was full of
pious gratitude. Yet the rhetorical spirit of that age was an
influence of singular intensity. It mastered not only the faculty
of utterance, but the whole mind and life of the rhetorician.
The passion to produce a startling or seductive effect on the
audience had become a second nature. Truth was a secondary
matter, not from any moral obliquity, but from the influence
of prolonged training. And so, we may retain a belief in the
genuine piety or superstition of Aristides, while we may distrust
his narrative. The piety or the mystic superstition may not
have been less sincere, although it was mingled with egregious
vanity, and expressed itself in the carefully moulded and highly
coloured phrases of the schools. Nor should we doubt the
piety of Aristides because he deemed himself the special object
of Divine favour. On such a principle all prayer for personal
benefits would become profane egotism. And although Aristides
was profoundly conscious that he was the first of Greek
orators,<note place="foot">On his vanity <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Baumgart, p. 110.
The most glaring example is in <hi rend="italic">Or. Sac.</hi>
4, 591-2,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐξεβόησα, εἶς, λέγων τὸν θεόν, καὶ ὅς ἔφη, σὺ εἶ</foreign>.</note> he was also profoundly grateful for the Divine grace
which had renewed his powers for the glory of God and the
delight and profit of mankind. Whether he would have been
content to enjoy his mystic raptures without publishing them
to the world, is a question which will be variously answered
according to the charity and spiritual experience of the inquirer.
</p>

<p>
Many another less famous shrine than that of Epidaurus
offered this kind of revelation. The gods were liberal in their
prophetic gifts in that age, and dreams were as freely sent as
they were generally expected. There is no more striking
example of the superstition of the age than the treatise of
Artemidorus on the interpretation of dreams. Artemidorus
lived towards the end of the second century. He was a
native of Ephesus, but he called himself Daldianus, in order
to share his distinction with an obscure little town in Lydia,
<pb n="468"/><anchor id="Pg468"/>which was the birthplace of his mother.<note place="foot">Artemid. <hi rend="italic">Oneirocrit.</hi> iii. 66.</note> The treatise is in
five books, three of which are dedicated to Cassius Maximus,
a Roman of rank, who was an adept in this pretended
science; the others are inscribed to the son of the author.
In spite of absurd credulity, wild and perverted ingenuity
and a cold, quasi-scientific tolerance of some of the worst
moral enormities of antiquity, Artemidorus seems to have
been an earnest and industrious man, who wrote with the
mistaken object of doing a service both to his own age
and to posterity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 1,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διὰ τὴν εὐχρηστίαν οὐ μόνον τὴν ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἀλλὰ καὶ
    τῶν μετέπειτα ἐσωμένων ἀνθρώπων</foreign>.</note> Like other pious men of the time, he
was afflicted by the profane attitude of the sceptics,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> Cf. Tertullian, <hi rend="italic">De An.</hi> 46, 47.</note> and
determined to refute them by the solid proofs of a sifted
experience. He also wished to furnish guidance to the crowd,
who believed in their visions, but were bewildered from the
want of clear canons of interpretation. There was evidently
afloat a voluminous oneirocritic literature. But it was, according
to Artemidorus, frequently wanting in depth and system,<note place="foot">Artemid. <hi rend="italic">Oneirocrit.</hi>
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐ γὰρ ἀπὸ πείρας ἀλλ’ αὐτοσχεδιάζοντες ... οὕτως ἔγραφον</foreign>. Praef.</note> and
random guesses had too often been the substitute for minute,
exhaustive observation and a clear scientific method. Artemidorus
was inspired to supply the want by a vision from Apollo,
his ancestral patron.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 70, <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note> He procured every known treatise on
dreams.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. Praef.,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐκ ἔστιν ὅ τι βιβλίον οὐκ ἐτησάμην ὀνειροκριτικόν</foreign>.</note> He travelled all over Asia, Greece, and Italy, and
the larger islands, visiting the great festivals and centres of
population, and consulting with all the seers and diviners, even
those of the lowest repute. He took the greatest pains to
ascertain the facts of the reported fulfilment of dreams, and to
compare and sift the facts of his own observation. No austere
scientific student of nature in our day ever took himself more
seriously than this collector of the wildest and foulest hallucinations
of pagan imagination. Artemidorus really believed that
he was founding an enduring science for the guidance of all
coming generations.
</p>

<p>
Yet the foundation of it all is essentially unscientific.
To Artemidorus dreams are not the result of natural causes,
of physical states, or of the suggestions of memory and
<pb n="469"/><anchor id="Pg469"/>association. They are sent directly by some god, as a promise
or warning of the future. Nor should any apparent failure of
the prediction tempt us to impeach the truthfulness of the
Divine author. Artemidorus affirms as emphatically as Plato,
that the gods can never lie.<note place="foot">Artemid. <hi rend="italic">Oneirocrit.</hi> iv. 71.</note> But although they sometimes express
themselves plainly, they also frequently veil their meaning
in shadowy, enigmatic form, in order to test men’s faith and
patience.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi>
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλὰ ποτὲ μὲν ἁπλῶς λέγουσι, ποτὲ δὲ αἰνίσσονται ...
    ἐπειδὴ καὶ σοφώτεροι ὄντες ἡμῶν αὐτῶν οὐδὲν ἡμᾶς
ἀβασανίστως βούλονται λαμβάνειν</foreign>.</note> Hence there is need of skilled interpretation, which
demands the widest observation, acute criticism combined with
reverent faith, and deference to ancient custom and traditional
lore. It is curious to see how this apostle of what, to our minds,
is a pestilent superstition, pours his scorn on the newer or lower
forms of divination.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 69.</note> The Pythagorean dream-readers, the interpreters
from hand and face and form, the interpreters of sieve
and dish and dice, are all deceivers and charlatans. The old
formulated and accredited lore of birds and sacrificial entrails,
of dreams and stars and heavenly portents, should alone be
accepted by an orthodox faith. It is needless to say that
Artemidorus believed in astrology as he believed in oneiromancy.
Both beliefs go back to the infancy of the race, and
both extended their dominion far into the Middle Ages.<note place="foot">Maury, p. 241.</note>
</p>

<p>
It would be impossible, in our space, to give any detailed
conception of the treatment of dreams by Artemidorus. Nor
would the attempt reward the pains; the curious specialist
must read the treatise for himself. He will find in it one
of the most astonishing efforts of besotted credulity to disguise
itself under the forms of scientific inquiry. He will find an
apparently genuine piety united with an unprotesting record
of the most revolting prurience of the lawless fancy. He will
find a subtlety and formalism of system and distinction worthy
of a finished schoolman of the fourteenth century, and all
employed to give order and meaning to the wildest vagaries
of vulgar fancy. The classification of dreams by Artemidorus
is a great effort, and is followed out in an exhaustive order.
Every possible subject, and many that seem to a modern
almost inconceivable, are catalogued, each in its proper place,
with the appropriate principles of explanation. The hierarchy
<pb n="470"/><anchor id="Pg470"/>of gods and heroes in their various grades, the orbs of the
sky, the various parts of the bodily frame, from the hair of
the head to the toes and nails, the various occupations and
multiform incidents in the life of man from the cradle to
the grave,<note place="foot">Artemid. <hi rend="italic">Oneirocrit.</hi> iv. Praef.</note> the whole list of animals, plants, and drugs which
serve his uses,—all these things, and many others which might
conceivably, or inconceivably, enter into the fabric of a
dream, are painfully collected and arranged for the guidance
of the future inquirer. And this demands not only an
effort of logical classification, but also an immense knowledge
of the customs and peculiarities of different races,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 4.</note>
the special attributes of each of the gods, and a minute
acquaintance with the natural history of the time. For,
special circumstances and details cannot be safely neglected
in the interpretation of dreams. It may make the greatest
difference whether the same dream comes to a rich man or a
poor man,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 13, 17.</note> to a man or a woman, to a married woman or a
virgin, to old or young, to king or subject. To one it may
mean the greatest of blessings, to another calamity or death.
For instance, for a priest of Isis to dream of a shaven head is
of good omen; to any other person it is ominous of evil.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 22.</note> To
dream that you have the head of a lion or elephant is a
prediction of a rise above your natural estate; but to dream
that you have the horns of an ox portends violent death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 37, 39.</note> To
dream of shoemaking and carpentry foretells happy marriage
and friendship, but the vision of a tanner’s yard, from its
connection with foul odours and death, may foreshadow disgrace
and disaster.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 51.</note> To dream of drinking cold water is a wholesome
sign; but a fancied draught of hot fluid, as being
unnatural, may forbode disease or failure.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> i. 66.</note> A man dreamt
that his mother was bearing him a second time; the issue
was that he returned from exile to his motherland, found his
mother ill, and inherited her property. Another had a vision
of an olive shooting from his head; he developed a vigour
and clearness of thought and language worthy of the goddess
to whom the olive is sacred.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> v. 18.</note> It would be wearisome, and even
disgusting, to give other examples of this futile and almost
<pb n="471"/><anchor id="Pg471"/>idiotic superstition, masquerading as a science. A painstaking
student might easily classify the modes of interpretation.
They are tolerably uniform, and rest on fanciful but obvious
conceits, superficial analogies, mere play upon words and
impossible etymologies. The interpretations are as dull and
monotonous as the dreams are various and fantastic. Many
of these visions seem like the wildest hallucinations of prurient
lunacy. It is difficult to conceive what was the ordinary state
of mind and the habits of a people whose sleep was haunted
by visions so lawless. It is perhaps even harder to imagine
a father, with the infinite industry of which he is so proud,
compiling such a catalogue for the study of his son.<note place="foot">Artemid. <hi rend="italic">Oneirocrit.</hi> v. Praef.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lucian, through the mouth of Momus, pours his scorn on
the new oracles which were chanting from every rock, vending
their lies at two obols apiece, and overshadowing the ancient
glories of the more ancient shrines.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Concil. Deor.</hi> c. 12,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ ἤδη πᾶς λίθος καὶ πᾶς βωμὸς χρησμῳδεῖ, κτλ.</foreign>
Cf. Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 14.</note> In the last century of
the Republic, and in the first century of the Empire, the faith
in oracles had suffered a portentous decay. The exultation of
the Christian Fathers at the desertion of the ancient seats
of prophecy seems to find an echo in the record of heathen
authors. Cicero speaks as if Delphi were almost silent.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De. Div.</hi> ii. 57, cur isto modo
iam oracula Delphis non eduntur non
modo nostra aetate, sed jamdiu, jam
ut nihil possit esse contemptius?</note>
Strabo tells us that Delphi, Dodona, and Ammon had shared
in the general contempt which had fallen on oracular divination.<note place="foot">Strab. ix. 3, 4, (419),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὠλιγώρεται δ’ ἱκανῶς καὶ τὸ ἱερόν, κτλ.</foreign>: vii. 7, 9,
(328) (Dodona); xvii. 1, 43 (Ammon).</note>
From Plutarch we have seen that in Boeotia, the most
famous home of the art, all the oracular shrines were silent
and deserted, except that of Trophonius at Lebadea.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. 5.</note> And
curious inquirers gave various explanations of this waning
faith. Strabo thought that, with the spread of Roman power,
the Sibylline prophecies and the Etruscan augury eclipsed the
Greek and Eastern oracles. The explanation in Plutarch, as
we have seen, is involved in an interesting discussion of the
various sources of inspiration, and, in particular, of the office
of daemons. One theorist of the positive type attributes the
failure of the Greek oracles to the growing depopulation of
Greece. It is a question of demand and supply. Others find
<pb n="472"/><anchor id="Pg472"/>the explanation in physical changes, which have extinguished
or diverted the exhalation that used to excite the prophetic
powers of the Pythia. Another falls back on the theory of
daemonic inspiration, which, mysteriously vouchsafed, may be
as mysteriously withdrawn.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Def. Or.</hi> c. 8, 38.</note>
</p>

<p>
The eclipse of the oracles was really a phase of that pagan
unbelief or indifference which tended to disappear towards
the end of the first century <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> And the eclipse perhaps
was not so complete as it is represented. Cicero himself
consulted the Pythia about his future fame, and received an
answer which revealed insight into his character.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Cic.</hi> c. 5.</note> Germanicus
in the reign of Tiberius visited the shrine of the Clarian
Apollo, and that of Apis at Memphis;<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 54.</note> Tiberius tried the
sacred lottery at Padua,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> c. xiv.</note> Caligula that of Fortune at Antium.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> c. lvii.</note>
Nero, although he is said to have choked the sacred chasm at
Delphi with corpses, had previously sought light from the
god on his perilous future.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, xl.</note> Before the altar of the unseen
God on Mount Carmel, Vespasian received an impressive
prophecy of his coming greatness.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> ii. 78.</note> Titus had his hopes
confirmed in the shrine of the Paphian Venus.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tit.</hi> c. v.</note> When these
lords of the world, some of whom were notorious sceptics, thus
paid deference to the ancient homes of prophecy, it may be
doubted whether their prestige had been seriously shaken.
</p>

<p>
Although Delphi had not for many ages wielded the
enormous political, and even international, power which it
enjoyed before the Persian wars, still, even in the days of its
greatest obscurity, it was the resort of many who came to
consult it in the ordinary cares of life. Apollonius of Tyana,
in the reign of Nero, visited the old oracular centres, Delphi,
Dodona, Abae, and the shrines of Amphiaraus and Trophonius.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 24.</note>
They seem to be still active, although the sage had, in
fulfilment of his mission, to correct their ritual. The newer
foundations, like that at Abonoteichos, found it politic to
defer to the authority of oracles, such as those of Clarus and
Didyma, with a great past.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 29.</note> If the conquests of Rome for
a time obscured their fame, the ease and rapidity of
com<pb n="473"/><anchor id="Pg473"/>munication along the Roman roads, and the safety of the seas,
must have swelled the number of their votaries from all parts
of the world. It is a revelation to find a Tungrian cohort at
a remote station in Britain setting up a votive inscription in
obedience to the voice of the Clarian Apollo.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p. 469.</note> If new oracles
were springing up in the Antonine age, the old were certainly
not quite neglected. In the reign of Trajan the shrine of Delphi
recovered from its degradation by the violence of Nero.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxiii. 14.</note> And
Hadrian, as we have seen, tested the inspiration of the Pythia
by a question as to the birthplace of Homer, which was
answered by a verse tracing his ancestry to Pylos and Ithaca.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Wolff. <hi rend="italic">De Nov. Orac. Aet.</hi> p. 5.</note>
The ancient oracles were in full vigour under the emperors of
the third century. Some of the greatest and most venerable—Delphi,
Didyma, Mallus, and Dodona—were not reduced
to silence till the reign of Constantine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> pp. 6, 52.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the old oracles could not satisfy the omnivorous superstition
of the time. The outburst of new oracles may be compared,
perhaps, to the fissiparous tendencies of Protestantism
in some countries, at each fresh revival of religious excitement.
Any fresh avenue to the <q>Great Mystery</q> was at once eagerly
crowded. And the most recent claimant to inspiration sometimes
threatened to overshadow the tradition of a thousand
years, and to assert an oecumenical power.
</p>

<p>
One such case has been recorded and exposed with the
graphic skill and penetrating observation of the greatest
genius of the age. Lucian’s description of the foundation of
the new oracle of Asclepius at Abonoteichos in Paphlagonia,
if it is wanting in the sympathetic handling which modern
criticism has attained or can affect, is an unrivalled revelation
of the superstition of the time. And a brief narrative
of the imposture will probably give a more vivid idea of it
than any abstract dissertation.
</p>

<p>
Alexander, the founder, was a man of mean parentage,
but of remarkable natural gifts. Tall and handsome in no
ordinary degree, he had eyes with a searching keenness, a look
of inspiration, and a voice most clear and sweet.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὀφθαλμοὶ πολὺ τὸ γοργὸν καὶ ἔνθεον διεμφαίνοντες, κτλ.</foreign></note> His mental
gifts were equal to his physical charm. In memory, quick
<pb n="474"/><anchor id="Pg474"/>perception, shrewdness, and subtlety, he had few equals. But
from his early youth, with the affectation of Pythagorean
asceticism, he had all the vices which go to make the finished
reprobate.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 4, 5.</note> After a youth of abandoned sensuality, in concert
with a confederate of no better character, he determined to
found an oracle. The times were favourable for such a
venture. Never had selfish desire and terror, twin roots of
superstition, such a hold on mankind.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 8,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ῥᾳδίως κατενόησαν τὸν τῶν ἀνθρώπων βίον ὑπὸ δυοῖν τούτοιν
μεγίστοιν τυραννούμενον</foreign>.</note> The problem was,
where to establish the new shrine. It must be founded among
a crassly stupid population, ready to accept any tale of the
marvellous with the most abandoned credulity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 9.</note> Paphlagonia
seemed to the shrewd observers the readiest prey. Tablets
were dug up, which predicted an epiphany of Asclepius at
Abonoteichos. A Sibylline oracle, in enigmatic verse, heralded
the coming of the god. Alexander, magnificently attired,
appeared upon the scene, with all the signs of mysterious
insanity, and the Paphlagonians were thrown into hysterical
excitement.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 12.</note> Their last new god was fished up from a lake
in the form of a young serpent, which had been artfully sealed
up in a goose’s egg. When the broken shell revealed the
nascent deity, the multitude were in an ecstasy of excitement
at the honour vouchsafed to their city. The infant reptile was
soon replaced by one full grown, to which a very elementary
art had attached a human head. It was displayed to the
crowds who trooped through the reception-room of the
impostor, and they went away to spread throughout all Asia the
tidings of the unheard-of miracle.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 15-18.</note> Alexander had carefully
studied the system of the older oracles, and he proceeded to
imitate it. He received inquiries on sealed tablets, and, with
all ancient pomp and ceremony of attendance, returned them,
apparently untouched, with the proper answer. But Lucian
minutely explains the art with which the seal of the missive
was dexterously broken and restored.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 20.</note> A hot needle and a
delicate hand could easily reveal the secret of the question,
and hide the trick. The oracle was primarily medical. Prescriptions
were given in more or less ambiguous phrases.
The charge for each consultation was, in our money, the
<pb n="475"/><anchor id="Pg475"/>small fee of a shilling.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 23,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐτέτακτο δὲ καὶ μισθὸς ἐφ’ ἑκάστῳ χρησμῷ δραχμὴ καὶ δύ’ ὀβολώ</foreign>.</note> Alexander was evidently a shrewd
business man, and his moderate charges attracting a crowd of
inquirers, the income of the oracle rose, according to Lucian,
to the then enormous sum of nearly £7000 a year.<note place="foot">If I am right in interpreting
Lucian’s statement,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ εἰς ἑπτὰ ἢ ὀκτὼ μυριάδας ἑκάστου ἔθους ἤθροιζεν</foreign>.</note> But the
manager was liberal to his numerous staff of secretaries, interpreters,
and versifiers.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c.
    <anchor id="corr475"/><corr sic="23">23,</corr>
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἅπασιν ἔνεμεν ἑκάστῳ τὸ κατ’ ἀξίαν</foreign>.</note> He had, moreover, missionaries who
spread his fame in foreign lands, and who offered the service
of the oracle in recovering runaway slaves, discovering buried
treasure, healing sickness, and raising the dead.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 24.</note> Even the
barbarians on the outskirts of civilisation were attracted by
his fame, and, after an interval required to find a translator
among the motley crowd who thronged from all lands, an
answer would be returned even in the Celtic or Syrian
tongue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 51,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλὰ καὶ βαρβάροις πολλάκις ἔχρησεν ... Συριστὶ ἢ Κελτιστί</foreign>.</note> The fame of the oracle, of course, soon spread to
Italy, where the highest nobles, eager for any novelty in
religion, were carried away by the pretensions of Alexander.
None among them stood higher than Rutilianus, either in
character or official rank. But he was the slave of every
kind of extravagant superstition.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 30,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλόκοτα περὶ τῶν θεῶν πεπιστευκώς, κτλ.</foreign></note> He would fall down and
grovel along the way before any stone which was shining
with oil or decked with garlands. He sent one emissary after
another to Abonoteichos to consult the new god. They
returned, some full of genuine enthusiasm, some hiding their
doubts by interested exaggeration of what they had seen.
Soon society and the court circle felt all the delight of a new
religious sensation. Great nobles hurried away to Paphlagonia,
and fell an easy prey to the gracious charm and the ingenious
charlatanry of Alexander.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 31.</note> Some, who had consulted the
oracle by questions which might have a sinister meaning, and
suggest dangerous ambitions, he knew how to terrify into his service
by the hint of possible disclosure.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 32.</note> All came back to swell
the fame of the Paphlagonian oracle and to make it fashionable
in Italy. But none were so besotted as Rutilianus. This great
Roman noble, who had been proved in a long career of office,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 30,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐν πολλαῖς τάξεσι ἐξητασμένος</foreign>.</note>
<pb n="476"/><anchor id="Pg476"/>at the mature age of sixty, stooped to wed the supposed
daughter of the vulgar charlatan by Selene, who had honoured
him with the love which she gave of old to Endymion!<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 35.</note>
And Rutilianus henceforth became the stoutest champion
of Alexander against all assaults of scepticism. For, in
spite of the credulity of the crowd and of the visitors from
Rome, there was evidently a strong body of sturdy dissent.
There were, in those days, followers of Epicurus even in
Paphlagonia, and, by a strange freak of fortune, the followers
of Christ found themselves making common cause against a
new outbreak of heathenism with the atheistic philosophy of
the Garden.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 38,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἴ τις ἄθεος ἢ Χριστιανὸς ἢ Ἐπικούρειος ἥκει κατάσκοπος
    τῶν ὀργίων, κτλ.</foreign>: cf. 25,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">λέγων ἀθέων ἐμπεπλῆσθαι καὶ Χριστιανῶν τὸν Πόντον, κτλ.</foreign></note> An honest Epicurean once convicted Alexander
of a flagrant deception, and narrowly escaped being stoned to
death by the fanatics of Paphlagonia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 46.</note> One of the books of
Epicurus was publicly burnt in the agora by order of Alexander,
and the ashes cast into the sea. Lucian himself, with his sly,
amused scepticism, tested and exposed the skill of the oracle
at the most imminent risk to his life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> cc. 53 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
But in spite of all exposure and opposition, the oracle,
managed with such art and supported with such blind
enthusiasm, conquered for a time the Roman world. It was
a period of calamity and gloom. Plague and earthquake added
their horrors to the brooding uncertainty of the dim conflict
on the Danube.<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> cc. 22, 17.</note> The emissaries of Alexander went everywhere,
exploiting the general terror. Prediction of coming evil was
safe at such a time; any shred of comfort or hope was eagerly
sought for. A hexameter verse, promising the help of Apollo,
was inscribed over every doorway as an amulet against the
awful pestilence of 166 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> Another ordered two lion’s cubs
to be flung into the Danube, to check the advance of the Marcomanni.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> cc. 36-48.</note>
Both proved dismal failures, but without shaking the
authority of the impostor, who found an easy apology in the
darkness of old Delphic utterances. He established mysteries
after the model of Eleusis, from which Christians and Epicureans
were excluded under a solemn ban. Scenes of old and new
mythologies were presented with brilliant effects—the labour of
<pb n="477"/><anchor id="Pg477"/>Leto, the birth of Apollo, the birth of Asclepius, the epiphany
of Glycon, the new wondrous serpent-deity of Abonoteichos, the
loves of Alexander and Selene. The second Endymion lay
sleeping, as on Latmus in the ancient story, and the moon
goddess, in the person of a great Roman dame, descended from
above to woo a too real earthly lover.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Alex.</hi> c. 38.</note>
</p>

<p>
Lucian’s history of the rise of the new oracle in Paphlagonia
is not, perhaps, free from some suspicion of personal
antipathy to the founder of it. He attributes to Alexander
not only the most daring deceit and calculating quackery, but
also the foulest vices known to the ancient world. These
latter charges may or may not be true. Theological or anti-theological
hatred has in all ages too often used the poisoned
arrow. And the moral character of Alexander has less
interest for us than the spiritual condition of his many
admirers and votaries. He can hardly be acquitted of some
form of more or less pious imposture. How far it was
accompanied by real religious enthusiasm is a problem which
will be variously solved, and which is hardly worth the trouble
of investigation, even if the materials existed for a certain
answer. But the eager readiness of a whole population to
hail the appearance of a new god, and the acceptance of his
claims by men the most cultivated and highly placed in
the Roman Empire, are facts on which Lucian’s testimony,
addressed to contemporaries, cannot be rejected. Nor is there
anything in our knowledge of the period from other sources
which renders the thing doubtful. Creative mythology had
revived its activity. Not long before the epiphany of Glycon,
in a neighbouring part of Asia Minor the Apostles Paul and
Barnabas, after the miraculous cure of the impotent man, had
difficulty in escaping divine honours. The Carpocratians, a
Gnostic sect, about the same time built a temple in honour
of the youthful son of their founder.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. 456.</note> The corn-goddess
Annona first appears in the first century, and inscriptions,
both in Italy and Africa, were set up in honour of the power
who presided over the commissariat of the Roman mob.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1810, 5320; cf. Preller,
<hi rend="italic">Rom. Myth.</hi> (Tr.), p. 415.</note> The
youthful favourite of Hadrian, after his mysterious death in
the waters of the Nile, was glorified by instant apotheosis.
<pb n="478"/><anchor id="Pg478"/>His statues rose in every market-place and temple court; his
soul was supposed to have found a home in a new star in the
region of the milky way; temples were built in his honour,
and the strange cult was maintained for at least a hundred
years after any motive could be found for adulation.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxix, 11; cf. Gregorov.
<hi rend="italic">Hadrian</hi>, p. 128.</note> The
Cynic brothers, and the gaping crowd who stood around the
pyre of Peregrinus at Olympia were eager, as we have seen, to
hail the flight of a great soul to join the heroes and demigods
in Olympus.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Morte Peregr.</hi> c. 29.</note> The cult of M. Aurelius was maintained by an
enthusiasm very different from the conventional apotheosis of
the head of the Roman State. We are told that he was adored,
by every age and sex and class, long after his death. His
sacred image found a place among the <hi rend="italic">penates</hi> of every
household, and the home where it was not honoured was of
more than suspected piety. Down to the time of Diocletian,
the saintly and philosophic emperor, who had preached an
imperturbable indifference to the chances and changes of life,
was believed to visit his anxious votaries with dreams of
promise or warning.<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. 18,
hodieque in multis domibus M. Antonini
statuae consistunt inter deos
penates ... sacrilegus judicatus est
qui ejus imaginem in sua domo non
habuit.</note>
</p>

<p>
Maximus of Tyre may have been guilty of no exaggeration
when he reckoned the heavenly host as thrice ten thousand.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> xiv. 8.</note>
The cynical voluptuary of Nero’s reign, who said that a town
of Magna Graecia was inhabited by more gods than men, only
used a comic hyperbole to enforce a striking fact.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 17.</note> The
anthropomorphic conceptions of Deity, which were prevalent,
easily overleapt the interval between the human and Divine.
The crowds of the Antonine age were as ready to recognise
the god in human form as the Athenians of the days of
Pisistratus, who believed that they saw in the gigantic Phye
an epiphany of the great goddess of their Acropolis, leading
the tyrant home.<note place="foot">Herod. i. 60.</note> In the minds of a philosophic minority,
nurtured on the theology of Plato, there might be the dim
conception of one awful and remote Power, far removed from
the grossness of earth, far above the dreams of mythologic
poetry and the materialist imagination of the masses. Yet
<pb n="479"/><anchor id="Pg479"/>even philosophy, as we have already seen, had succumbed to
the craving for immediate contact, or for some means of communication,
with the Infinite Spirit. The daemons of Plutarch
and Maximus of Tyre were really a new philosophic mythology,
created to give meaning and morality to the old gods. These
hosts of baleful or ministering spirits, with which the Platonist
surrounded the life of man, divine in the sweep of their power,
human in their passions or sympathies, belong really to the
same order as the Poseidon who pursued Odysseus with tempest,
or the Moon goddess who descended on Latmus to kiss the
sleeping Endymion. Anthropomorphic paganism was far from
dead; it was destined to live openly for more than three hundred
years, and to prolong a secret life of subtle influence under
altered forms, the term of which who shall venture to fix?
</p>

<p>
The daemons of the Platonic philosophers find their counterpart
in the popular cult of <hi rend="italic">genii</hi>. If there was a visible
tendency to syncretism and monotheistic faith in the second
century, there was a no less manifest drift to the endless
multiplication of spiritual powers. The tendency, indeed, to
create divine representatives of physical forces and dim
abstract qualities was from early ages congenial to the Roman
mind. All the phenomena of nature—every act, pursuit, or
vicissitude in human life—found a spiritual patron in the
Roman imagination.<note place="foot">Preller, <hi rend="italic">Myth. Rom.</hi> p. 65, 66,
387.</note> But the tendency received an immense
impulse in the age with which we are dealing, and the
inscriptions of the imperial period reveal an almost inexhaustible
fertility of religious fancy. Every locality, every
society and occupation of men, has its patron genius, to whom
divine honours are paid or recorded,—the canton, the municipality,
the curia; the spring or grove; the legion or cohort
or troop; the college of the paviors or smiths or actors; the
emperors, or even the great gods themselves.<note place="foot">Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> Ind. pp. 27, 28; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
especially 1730 (genius Jovis), 1812
(Neronis), 193 (Arvernorum), 2204
(Col. Ostiensis), 689 (municipii), 1704
(legionis), 4113 (pavimentariorum),
6628 (fontis).</note>
</p>

<p>
The old gods of Latium still retained a firm hold on the
devotion of the simple masses, as crowds of inscriptions record.
But ancient religion, in its cruder forms, divided and localised
the Divine power by endless demarcations of place and
function. Although the Roman centurion or merchant might
<pb n="480"/><anchor id="Pg480"/>believe in the power of his familiar gods to follow him with
their protection, and never forgot them, still each region, to
which his wanderings carried him, had its peculiar spirits, who
wielded a special potency within their own domain, and whom
it was necessary to propitiate. On hundreds of provincial
inscriptions we can read the catholic superstition of the
Roman legionary. The mystery of desert or forest, the
dangers of march and bivouack, stimulated his devotion. If
he does not know the names of the strange deities, he will
invoke them collectively side by side with the gods whom he
has been taught to venerate. He will adore the <q>genius
loci,</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2135, Sei Deo Sei Deivae
Sac. etc.; 1580, Aesculapio et Hygiae
caeterisque diis deabusque hujus loci
Salutaribus; 5902, Hospitibus diis
Mauricis et genio loci, etc.</note> or all the gods of Mauritania or of Britain. And so
the deities of Alsace and Dacia and Lusitania, of the Sahara
and Cumberland, easily took their place in his growing
pantheon.<note place="foot">Cf. Tertull. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> c. 24.</note> They were constantly identified with the great
figures of Greek or Roman mythology. Many an inscription
is dedicated to Apollo Grannus of Alsace, whom Caracalla
invoked for the recovery of his health, along with Serapis and
Aesculapius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1997-2001; cf. D. Cass.
lxxvii. 15.</note> Apollo Belenus, a favourite deity in Southern
Gaul, was the special patron of Aquileia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 823, 1967.</note> Batucardus and
Cocideus received vows and dedications in Cumberland and
Westmorland, Arardus and Agho in the Pyrenees, Abnoba in
the Black Forest;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1959, 1986, 1954; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
xii. 1556, 3097; viii. 9195, 4578, 8834.</note> and many another deity with strange, outlandish
name, like their provincial votaries, were honoured
with sacred Roman citizenship, and took their places, although
in a lower grade, with Serapis of Alexandria or <anchor id="corr480"/><corr sic="Aesclepius">Asclepius</corr> of
Epidaurus. The local heroes were also adored at wayside
shrines or altars, which met the traveller in lonely passes. In
the heart of the Nubian desert, inscriptions, scratched on obelisk
or temple porch, attest the all-embracing faith of the Roman
legionary.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. pp. 482-4.</note> At Carlsbourg in Transylvania, a legate of the
5th Legion records his own gratitude to Aesculapius and all
the gods and goddesses of the place, and that of his wife and
daughter, for the recovery of his sight.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1580.</note> A praetorian prefect,
visiting the hot springs of Vif left a graceful inscription to
<pb n="481"/><anchor id="Pg481"/>the gods of the eternal fire.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5689.</note> A legate of the 5th Legion
returns pious thanks to Hercules and the <hi rend="italic">genius loci</hi>, at the
baths in Dacia sacred to the hero.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1560.</note> Many a slab pays honour
to the nymphs who guarded the secret spring, especially where
a source, long since forgotten, had resumed its flow.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1632, 4, 7; Nymphis ob reditum
aquarum, etc.</note> A chief
magistrate of Lambesi is specially grateful that the town has
been refreshed by a new fountain during his year of office.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 5758.</note>
The heroes of poetic legend were still believed to haunt the
scene of their struggles. Apollonius once spent a night in
ghostly converse with the shade of Achilles beside his tomb in
the Troad, and was charged by the divine warrior to convey his
reproaches for the neglect of his worship in the old Thessalian
home of the Myrmidons.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 16,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Θετταλοὶ γὰρ τὰ ἐναγίσματα χρόνον ἤδη πολὺν εκλελοίπασί μοι</foreign>.</note> The Troad had a hero of much
later date, the proconsul Neryllinus, who was believed to deliver
oracles and to heal the sick.<note place="foot">Friedl. <hi rend="italic">Sittengesch.</hi> iii. p. 479.</note>
</p>

<p>
In a time of such vivid belief in the universal presence
of divine beings, faith in miracle was a matter of course.
Christian and pagan were here at least on common ground.
Nay, the Christian apologists did not dispute the possibility
of pagan miracles, or even of pagan oracular inspiration. It
is curious to see that Origen and Celsus, as regards the probability
of recurring miracle, are on very much the same plane
of spiritual belief, and that the Christian apologist is fighting
with one arm tied. He is disabled from delivering his assaults
at the heart of the enemy’s position. The gods of heathenism
are still to him living and potent spirits, although they are
spirits of evil.<note place="foot">Orig. <hi rend="italic">C. Celsum</hi>, lib. iii. p. 124,
ed. Spencer; lib. vii. p. 334, Friedl.
iv. p. 458; S. Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. D.</hi> xix. 23,
quis ita stultus est qui non intelligat ... consilio
simili ab impuris daemonibus
ita fuisse responsa, etc.; cf.
viii. 22, mirabilibus et fallacibus signis
sive factorum sive praedictorum deos
se esse persuaserunt.</note> The pagan daemonology, on its worse side,
had been accepted by the champion of the Church. Yet
it is hard to see how, on such principles, he could deal
with the daemon of the Apolline shrine at Delphi, when he
denounced the Spartan Glaucus for the mere thought of a
breach of faith to his friend,<note place="foot">Herodot. vi. 86.</note> or the daemon who lurked under
the pure stately form of Athene Polissouchos, when she threw
<pb n="482"/><anchor id="Pg482"/>a maiden goddess’s protection around the Antigones of Athens.
In the field of miracle in the second century the heathen could
easily match the Christian. With gods in every grove and
fountain, and on every mountain summit; with gods breathing
in the winds and flashing in the lightning, or the ray of sun
and star, heaving in the earthquake or the November storm in
the Aegean, watching over every society of men congregated
for any purpose, guarding the solitary hunter or traveller in
the Alps or the Sahara, what is called miracle became as
natural to the heathen as the rising of the sun. In fact, if
the gods had not displayed their power in some startling way,
their worshippers would have been shocked and forlorn. But
the gods did not fail their votaries. Unquestioning and
imperious faith in this kind is always rewarded, or can always
explain its disappointments. The Epicurean, the Cynic, or the
Aristotelian, might pour their cold scorn on tales of wonder.
An <hi rend="italic">illuminé</hi> like Lucian, attached to no school, and living
merely in the light of clear cultivated sense, might shake his
sides with laughter at the tales which were vouched for by a
spiritualist philosophy. But the drift of the time was against
all such protests. The Divine power was everywhere, and
miracle was in the air.
</p>

<p>
Enough has been said of the dreams and signs and omens
which in the first and second century heralded every accession
to the throne and every death of a prince, and which even
Tacitus records with more or less vacillating faith. Enough,
too, has been said of the miracles of healing which were
wrought by the sons of Asclepius in his many shrines from
Pergamum to the island in the Tiber. The miracles wrought
by Vespasian at Alexandria are the most hackneyed example
of belief in miracle, because the tale is told by the greatest
master of vivid narrative in a book which every educated
man has read. The sensible Vespasian was not confident
of his power to give energy to the impotent, even on the
strength of a dream sent by Serapis, just as he jested on his
deathbed about his approaching apotheosis. But the efficiency
of the imperial touch was vouched for by eye-witnesses, to
whom Tacitus would not refuse his credence. The chronicler
of the age of Diocletian has surrounded the death-bed of
Hadrian with similar wonders. A blind man from Pannonia
<pb n="483"/><anchor id="Pg483"/>came and touched the fever-wracked emperor, and immediately
regained his sight. The legend of the Thundering Legion was
long the battle-ground of opposing faiths equally credulous, and
equally bent on securing the credit of supernatural powers.
The timely rainfall was attributed with equal assurance to
the incantations of an Egyptian sorcerer, to the prayers of
the believers in Jupiter, or the prayers of the believers in
Christ. Apuleius, who was himself prosecuted for practising
the black art, has filled his Thessalian romance with the most
astounding tales of fantastic sorcery. He may have copied
other lawless romances, but he would hardly have given
such space to these weird arts if his public had not had an
uneasy belief in them. The home of Medea in the days of
M. Aurelius was a veritable witch’s cave: the air is tremulous
with superstitious fear: everything seems possible in the field
of miraculous metamorphosis or monstrous vice. If Apuleius
had meant to discredit superstition by wedding it to disgusting
sensuality, he could hardly have succeeded better. But
he was more probably bent, with perverted skill, on producing
a work which might allure imaginations haunted by
the ghosts of hereditary sensuality and a spiritual terror revived
in redoubled force. An Egyptian priest with tonsure and linen
robes raises a dead man to life who has been <q>floating on
the Stygian streams.</q> Or you are admitted to a witch’s
laboratory, open to all the winds and stored with all the
wreckage of human life—timbers of ships splintered on cruel
rocks, the curdled blood and mangled flesh of murdered men,
toothless skulls gnawed by beasts of prey. You see the
transformation going on before your eyes under the magic of
mysterious unguents, the feathers springing from the flesh, or
the human sinking into the ass’s form. Tales like these,
which to us are old wives’ tales, may have had a strange
charm for an age when human life was regarded as the slave
of fate, or the sport of the inscrutable powers of the unseen
universe.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="2" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="484"/><anchor id="Pg484"/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. Belief in immortality"/><index index="pdf" level1="II. Belief in immortality"/>
<head>CHAPTER II</head>

<head type="sub">BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY</head>

<p>
A great part of the charm of those oriental religions, on the
study of which we are about to enter, lay in the assurance
which they seemed to give of an immortal life. It would,
therefore, appear a necessary preface to such a review to examine
some of the conceptions of the state of the departed
which the missionaries of Isis and Mithra found prevalent
in the minds of their future votaries. Immortality, in any
worthy sense, is inseparable from the idea of God. And the
conception of continued life must always be shaped by the
character of a people’s beliefs as to the powers of the unseen
world. A pantheon of dim phantasms or abstractions will not
promise more than a numb spectral future to the human shade.
The nectar and ambrosia of Olympian feasts may have their
human counterpart in an <q>eternal debauch.</q> The Platonist will
find his eternal hope in emancipation from the prison of the flesh,
and in the immediate vision of that Unity of all beauty, truth,
and goodness, which is his highest conception of God. But
not only does religion necessarily colour the conception of
the eternal state: it may also furnish the warrant for a belief
in it. And a religion which can give men a firm ground for
that faith will have an immense advantage over others which
are less clear and confident as to another world. It is generally
admitted that the long array of philosophic arguments
for immortality have by themselves little convincing power.
They are not stronger, nor perhaps so strong as the argument
from the wish for continued life, inveterate in the human
spirit, on which Plutarch laid so much stress.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Non posse suav. vivi</hi>, etc. c. 26 sq.; <hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> c. 18.</note> Even amid the
<pb n="485"/><anchor id="Pg485"/>triumphant dialectic of the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi>, an undertone of doubt
in any human proof of immortality is sometimes heard, along
with the call for some <q>divine doctrine</q> as a bark of safety
on perilous seas.<note place="foot">Plat. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 85 <hi rend="small">D</hi>,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἰ μή τις δύναιτο ἀσφαλέστερον ἐπὶ βεβαιοτέρου ὀχήματος
[ἢ] λόγου θείου τινὸς διαπορευθῆναι</foreign>.</note> The inextinguishable instinct of humanity
craves for a voice of revelation to solve the mystery of life
and death.
</p>

<p>
The Roman spirit, down to the Antonine age, had been the
subject of many influences which had inspired widely various
ideas of the future state. And the literary and funerary
remains from Nero to M. Aurelius are full of contradictions
on the subject. Nor, in the absence of authoritative revelation
on a field so dark to reason, is this surprising. Even
Christian teaching, while it offers a sure promise of a life to
come, has not lifted the veil of the great mystery, and the
material imagery of the Apocalypse, or the shadowed hints of
Jesus or S. Paul, have left the believer of the twentieth century
with no clearer vision of the life beyond the tomb than that
which was vouchsafed to Plato, Cicero, Virgil, or Plutarch.
<q>We know not what we shall be,</q> is the answer of every
seer of every age. Something will always <q>seal the lips of the
Evangelist,</q> as the key of the Eumolpidae closed the lips of
those who had seen the vision of Eleusis.<note place="foot">Soph. <hi rend="italic">O.C.</hi> 1055.</note> The pagans of the
early Empire were thus, in the absence of dogma and ecclesiastical
teaching, free to express, with perfect frankness, their
unbelief or their varying conceptions of immortality, according
to the many influences that had moulded them. Nor could
these influences be kept apart even in the same mind. Even
the poet seer, who was to be the guide of Dante in the shades,
has failed to blend the immemorial faith of the Latin race with
the dreams of future beatitude or anguish which came to him
from Pythagorean or Platonic teaching.<note place="foot">Sellar’s <hi rend="italic">Virgil</hi>, p. 367; cf. Boissier,
<hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 367.</note> In the sixth book of
the <hi rend="italic">Aeneid</hi> the eschatologies of old Rome and Greece are combined,
but not blended, with the doctrines of transmigration
and purgatorial expiation descending from Pythagoras or the
Orphic mystics. Virgil, in fact, mirrors the confusion of beliefs
which prevailed in his own age, and which pre-eminently
characterised the age of the Antonines.
</p>

<pb n="486"/><anchor id="Pg486"/>

<p>
Along with other archaic elements of the Latin faith, the
cult of the Manes held its ground, especially in secluded homes
of old Italian piety. The most ancient Indo-European conception
of the state after death was that of a continuance or
faint, shadowy reproduction of the life on earth; it was not
that of a vast and mysterious change to a supernatural order.
The departed spirit was believed to linger in a dim existence
in the vault or grave near the familiar homestead.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi> i. 16, sub terra censebant
reliquam vitam agi mortuorum; cf. F.
de Coulanges, <hi rend="italic">La Cité Ant.</hi> p. 8.</note> The tomb
is not a temporary prison, but an everlasting home,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4525.</note> and often
provides a chamber where the living members of the family
or clan may gather on solemn days around the ashes of the
dead.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4433, posticum cum apparitorio,
et compitum a solo pecun. sua fecerunt,
etc.; cf. 4353; Petron. c. 71.</note> Provision is made for the sustenance of this spectral
life. Vessels for food and drink, the warrior’s arms, the workman’s
tools, the cosmetics of the lady, the child’s playthings,
are buried with them.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 367.</note> Or they are figured on their tombs
cheerfully engaged in their familiar crafts,<note place="foot">Cf. Duruy, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Rom.</hi> v. 637.</note> not with folded
hands, and calm, expectant faces, like the marble forms which
lie in our cathedral aisles awaiting the Resurrection.
</p>

<p>
With such views of the tomb, the perpetual guardianship
of it became to the Roman a matter of supreme moment. It
is a chapel or an altar, as well as a last home.<note place="foot">Aesch. <hi rend="italic">Choeph.</hi> 92, 488; F. de
Coulanges, <hi rend="italic">La Cité Ant.</hi> p. 16.</note> It is the
meeting-place, in faint ghostly communion, of the society which
embraced, by its solemn rites, the members of the household
church in the light or in the shades. All the cautious forms
of Roman law are invoked to keep the sepulchre, with its
garden and enclosure, from passing into alien hands. Its
site is exactly described, with the minutest measurements,
and the intruder or the alienator is threatened with curses or
with fines, to be paid into the public treasury.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7364, 7338, 4076, 4417,
4422.</note> Here, among
his children and remotest descendants, among his freedmen
and freedwomen, the Roman dreamed of resting for ever
undisturbed.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4428, somno aeterno sacr. ... fecerunt
sibi et suis libertis libertabusque,
etc., 4631, 4435.</note> And many an appeal comes to us from the
original slab not to violate the eternal peace.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4781, 3, 5, 6, 4790, quisquis
hoc sustulerit aut laeserit ultimus
suorum moriatur.</note> What that dim
<pb n="487"/><anchor id="Pg487"/>life beneath the marble or the sod, at least in the later times,
was conceived to be, how far it involved a more or less vivid
consciousness of what was passing in the world above, how far
it was a numb repose, almost passing into <q>the eternal sleep,</q>
seems to be uncertain. The phrases on the tomb in all ages are
apt to pass into conventional forms, and personal temperament
and imagination must always give varying colour to the picture.
Such phrases as <q>eternal sleep,</q> however, did not probably at
any time imply complete unconsciousness. The old Latin
faith that the Manes had a real life and some link of
sympathy with the living was still strong and vivid in an age
which was eager to receive or answer voices from the world
beyond the senses. The wish to maintain, in spite of the
severance and shock of death, a bond of communion between
the living and the departed was one of the most imperious
instincts of the Latin race. It was not a mere imagination,
projected on far distant years, which craved for the yearly
offering of violets and roses, or the pious <hi rend="italic">ave</hi> of the passing
traveller.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4775, 4419, 4420, 4415,
4737; T. Lollius positus propter viam
ut dicant praeterientes, Lolli ave, cf.
4745.</note> The dwellers in the vault still remained members
of the family, to which they are linked for ever by a dim
sympathy expressed in ritual communion. Every year, on the
<hi rend="italic">dies parentales</hi> in February, there was a general holiday,
cheerfully kept in honour of all those whose spirits were at
peace.<note place="foot">Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 307.</note> On the eighth day, the festival of <hi rend="italic">cara cognatio</hi>,
there was a family love-feast, in which quarrels were forgotten,
and the members in the spirit-world joined in the sacred meal.
But besides this public and national commemoration, the birthday
of each departed member was observed with offerings of wine
and oil and milk. The tomb was visited in solemn procession;
dead and living shared the sacred fare; flowers were scattered,
and with an <hi rend="italic">ave</hi> or a prayer for help and good fortune, the
shade was left to its renewed repose.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4414, 4417, nam curatores
substituam qui vescantur ex
horum hortorum reditu natali meo et
praebeant rosam in aeternum. Hos
neque dividi neque alienari volo.</note> Many a slab makes
anxious provision for these communions, and the offering of
violets and roses in their season.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4084, 4100, 4420.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the Roman in his tomb longed to be near the sound of
<pb n="488"/><anchor id="Pg488"/>busy human life, and to feel the tread of pious feet, which
might turn aside for a moment to salute even a stranger’s
memory. This feeling is expressed in the long rows of vaults
which line so many of the great roads, the Via Appia, or the
way from Pompeii to Nola.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. 362; Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>,
p. 421 sqq.; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi> i. 16.</note> There were many like that Titus
Lollius who had himself laid close to the road into Aquae
Sextiae, that the passers might for ever greet his spirit with
an <hi rend="italic">ave</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4737.</note> Others leave a prayer for all good things to those
who will stop an instant and read the legend; <q>may the earth
lie light upon them when they too depart.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7396, 7402, vivite felices qui
legitis.</note> The horror of the
lonely soul, cut off from the kindly fellowship of the living,
and lingering on in a forgotten grave, to which no loving hand
should ever more bring the libation or the violets in spring,
which should one day awake no memory or sympathy in
any human heart, was to the old Roman the worst terror in
death. This passion for continued memory, especially in great
benefactors of their kind, is used by Cicero as an argument
for immortality,<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi> i. 12, 27, quas (caeremonias
sepulcrorum) ingeniis praediti
nec tanta cura coluissent, nec violatas
tam inexpiabili religione sanxissent,
nisi haereret in eorum mentibus mortem
non interitum esse omnia tollentem,
etc.</note> and the passion for enduring life blends
indistinguishably with the wish to be long remembered.
Even Epicurus, the apostle of annihilation, made provision in
his last testament for yearly offerings in honour of himself
and Metrodorus his disciple—a curious instance of agnostic
conformity.<note place="foot">Aelian, <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> p. 1023 (Gronov.).</note> The passion for remembrance was responded to
by the dutiful devotion of many generations. The cult of the
dead long survived in the cult of martyrs, and the pagan
feasting at their tombs disturbed and perplexed S. Augustine
and S. Paulinus of Nola.<note place="foot">S. Paulin. Nol. <hi rend="italic">Carm.</hi> 27; S.
Aug. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 22, <hi rend="italic">Serm.</hi> v. xvii.; cf. Sidon.
Apoll. v. 17; Bingham, <hi rend="italic">Antiq. of Chr.
Church</hi>, ii. p. 1165.</note>
</p>

<p>
The old Roman thought of his departed friends as a company
of good and kindly spirits, who watched over the family
on earth. But there was another conception of spirits in the
other world, whether derived from the gloomy superstition of
Etruria, or descending from days anterior to orderly devotion
to the dead.<note place="foot">Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 108.</note> The Lemures were a name of fear. They
<pb n="489"/><anchor id="Pg489"/>were dark, malevolent spirits who craved for blood, as they
had departed this life by a violent end. Their festival, the
Lemuria in May, was quite distinct from the festival of the
Manes, and the household ritual for laying the ghosts by the
spitting of black beans and a ninefold form of exorcism savours
of a far-gone age. These maleficent powers were propitiated
by blood—especially by the blood of men in the combats of
the arena.
</p>

<p>
The visitations of these beings, whether as guardian,
ministering spirits or as evil powers, were expected and believed
in for many ages by all classes of Roman minds. The ancient
Latin faith as to the state of the dead was, according to Cicero,
confirmed by many tales of spiritual apparition. There are
pathetic memorials which end with an appeal in which the
lonely wife entreats the lost one sometimes to return in dream
or vision.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4775, horis nocturnis ut
eum videam, et possim dulcius et
celerius aput eum pervenire.</note> One vivacious inscription challenges the sceptic to
lay his wager and make the experiment of a summons from
the unseen world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7346.</note> The spread of cremation instead of burial
gradually led to a new conception of the spirit as having a
separate existence from the body, now reduced to a handful
of grey ashes.<note place="foot">Marq. <hi rend="italic">Priv.</hi> i. pp. 438-9; Preller,
<hi rend="italic">Rom. Myth.</hi> (Tr.), p. 331.</note> And spirits no longer clung to the body in
the family vault, but were gathered in a dim region near the
centre of the earth, where, according to gloomy Etrurian fancy,
they were under the cruel care of the conductor of the dead, a
brutal figure, with wings and long, matted beard, and armed
with a hammer, who for ages appeared in human form to close
the last ghastly scene in the gladiatorial combats.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Hist.</hi> i. p. 189;
Tertull. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> xv. vidimus et Jovis
fratrem gladiatorum cadavera cum
malleo deducentem.</note> From
this limbo of the departed a sort of gateway was provided in
every Latin town in the <hi rend="italic">Mundus</hi>, a deep trench intended to represent
an inverted heaven, which was dug before the <hi rend="italic">pomoerium</hi>
was traced. Its lower aperture was closed by the stone of the
Manes, which on three solemn days, in August, October, and
November, was lifted to permit the spirits from the deep to
pass for a time into the upper world. Thus a public sanction
was given to the belief in the commerce between this life and
the next.<note place="foot">Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 211.</note>
</p>

<pb n="490"/><anchor id="Pg490"/>

<p>
Cicero had said that the faith in immortality was sustained
by the fact of spirits returning to the world of sense. In the
first and second centuries there was no lack of such aids to
faith. Apparitions became the commonest facts of life, and
only the hardiest minds remained incredulous about them.
Philosophers of all schools, except the Epicurean, were swept
into the current. The <hi rend="italic">Philopseudes</hi> of Lucian is a brilliant
effort to ridicule the superstition of the age, but the attack
would have been discredited if it had not had a foundation
of fact. There, around the sick-bed of Eucrates, himself
saturated with philosophy, are gathered a Stoic, a Peripatetic,
a Pythagorean, a Platonist, and a trained physician.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Philops.</hi> c. 6.</note> And
they regale one another with the most weird and exciting
tales of the marvellous. Ion, the Platonic student, has seen
the exorcism of a black and smoky daemon.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 16.</note> Eucrates has
seen such spirits a thousand times, and, from long habit, has
lost all fear of them. At vintage time, he once saw a gigantic
Gorgon figure in the woods in broad daylight, and by the
turning of a magic ring had revealed to him the gulf of
Tartarus, the infernal rivers, and been even able to recognise some
of the ghosts below.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> cc. 22-24.</note> On another day, as he lay upon his bed
reading the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi>, his <q>sainted wife,</q> who had recently died,
appeared and reproached him because, among all the finery
which had been burnt upon her pyre, a single gold-spangled
shoe, which slipped under the wardrobe, had been forgotten.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 27.</note>
Plutarch reports, apparently with perfect faith, the appearance
of such spectral visitors at Chaeronea.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cim.</hi> c. 1,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον εἰδώλων τινῶν ἐν τῷ τόπῳ προφαινομένων,
ὡς οἱ πατέρες ἡμῶν λέγουσι, κτλ.</foreign></note> The younger Pliny consulted
his friend Sura as to the reality of such apparitions, and
reveals his faith in the gruesome tale of a haunted house at
Athens, where a restless ghost, who had often disturbed the quiet
of night with the clank of chains, was tracked to the mystery of
a hidden grave.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vii. 27.</note> Suetonius, of course, welcomes tales of this
kind from every quarter. Before Caligula’s half-burnt remains
were borne stealthily to a dishonoured burial, the keepers of
the Lamian Gardens had been disturbed each night by ghostly
terrors.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> c. 59.</note> The pages of Dion Cassius abound in similar wonders.
<pb n="491"/><anchor id="Pg491"/>When Nero attempted to cut through the Isthmus of Corinth,
the dead arose in numbers from their graves.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxii. 17.</note> In such an
age the baleful art of <q>evocation</q> acquired a weird attraction
and importance. By spells and incantations Hecate was
invoked to send up spirits, often for evil ends.<note place="foot">Lobeck, <hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> i. p. 221.</note> And there
were dark rumours of the spell being fortified by the blood of
children. Many of the emperors from Tiberius to Caracalla
had dabbled in this witchcraft.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lvii. 15.</note> When Nero was haunted by
the Furies of his murdered mother, he is said to have offered a
magic sacrifice to evoke and appease her spirit.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>, c. xxxiv.</note> The early
Neo-Platonists were, of course, eager to admit the reality of such
visits from the unseen world. In anxious quest of any link
of sympathy between this world and the next, Maximus tries
to fortify his doctrine of daemons by stories of apparitions.<note place="foot">Max. Tyr. xv. 7.</note>
Hector has been often seen darting across the Troad in shining
armour. At the mouth of the Borysthenes, Achilles has been
espied by mariners, who were sailing past his isle, careering
along with his yellow locks and arms of gold, and singing his
paean of battle.
</p>

<p>
In enlarging its rather blank and poor conception of the
future state, the Latin race, as in other fields, was content to
borrow rather than invent. The Sixth Book of the Aeneid was
an effort not only to glorify the legendary heroes of Rome, but
to appease a new or revived longing for the hope of immortality,
after the desolating nihilism of the Epicurean philosophy had
run its course.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p. 316.</note> Virgil has some touches of old Roman faith
about the dead, but the scenery of his Inferno is mainly
derived from Greek poetry inspired by Orphism, and the
vision is moralised, and also confused, by elements drawn from
Pythagoras or Plato.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 279; cf. Conington, <hi rend="italic">Introd.
Aen.</hi> vi. p. 419; Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. p.
165.</note> The scene of Aeneas’s descent to the
underworld is laid by the lake of Avernus, where, buried
amid gloomy woods, was the cave of the Cumaean Sibyl.
Cumae was the oldest Greek colony in the West. Its foundation
was placed long before the days of Romulus. Rich,
prosperous, and cultivated, at a time when the Romans were
a band of rude warriors, it must have early transmitted Greek
<pb n="492"/><anchor id="Pg492"/>ideas of religion to the rising power on the Tiber.<note place="foot">Grote, ii. p. 518 (ed. 1862).</note> The
Etrurians also, who affected so profoundly the tone of Roman
religion, had come under Greek influences. The spectral ferryman
of the dead was a familiar figure in Etruscan art. Thus,
both on the south and north, Latium had points of contact
with the world of Hellenic legend. And from the early days
of the Republic, the worship of Greek gods—Apollo, Asclepius,
or the Dioscuri—became naturalised at Rome. Probably of
even earlier date was the influence of the oracular lore of
Greece through Delphi and the oracle of Cumae.<note place="foot">Mommsen, <hi rend="italic">R. Hist.</hi> i. p. 187;
Preller, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Myth.</hi> pp. 197, 407, 438.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the threshold of the underworld Aeneas and the Sibyl
are confronted by the monstrous forms of Hellenic legend—Centaurs
and Scyllas, Harpies and Gorgons, the fire-armed
Chimaera, and the hissing hydra of Lerna.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> vi. 289.</note> They have to
pass the ninefold barrier of the Styx in Charon’s steel-grey
bark. The grisly ferryman of the infernal stream, foul and
unkempt, with fixed eyes of flame, is surrounded by a motley
crowd, thick as autumnal leaves, all straining and eager for
the further shore. Landed on a waste expanse of mud and
sedge,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 313, 416.</note> they pass the kennel of triple-headed Cerberus, and on
to the judgment seat, where Minos assigns to each soul its
several doom, according to the deeds done in the body. Thence
they traverse the <q>mourning fields,</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 441.</note> where are those sad
queens of Grecian tragedy whose wild loves have been their
undoing, and among them Phoenician Dido, who, with stony
silence and averted gaze, plunges into the darkness of the
wood.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 472.</note> As the dawn is breaking, they find themselves before
the prison-house of the damned, rising amid the folds of
the river of fire, with walls of iron and adamant, its portals
watched by a sleepless Fury in blood-red robe.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 555.</note> From within
are heard the cries of anguish and the clank of chains, as
the great rebels and malefactors of old-world story—Ixion,
Salmoneus, and the Titans—are tortured by lash and wheel
and vulture.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 600.</note> And with them, sharing the same agony, are
those who have violated the great laws on which the Roman
character was built.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 608.</note> Through other dusky ways and Cyclopean
portals they at last reach the home of the blessed, as it was
<pb n="493"/><anchor id="Pg493"/>pictured long before in the apocalypse of Pindar—the meads
and happy groves of Elysium, under another sun and other
stars than ours, and bathed in the splendour of an ampler
air.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> 640; cf. Pind. <hi rend="italic">Ol.</hi> ii. 130.</note> Here is the eternal home of the heroic souls of a nobler
age, men who have died for fatherland, holy priests and
bards and founders of the arts which soften and embellish
the life of men. But though their home is radiant with a
splendour not of earth, they are, in old Roman and Greek
fashion, occupied with the toils or pleasures of their earthly
life. Youthful forms are straining their sinews in the
wrestling-ground as of old. The ancient warriors of Troy
have their shadowy chariots beside them, their lances planted
in the sward, their chargers grazing in the meadow. Others
are singing old lays or dancing, and the bard of Thrace
himself is sweeping the lyre, as in the days when he sped the
Argo through the <q>Clashing Rocks</q> in the quest of the fleece
of gold.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> vi. 645.</note>
</p>

<p>
The vision closes with a scene which criticism has long
recognised as irreconcilable with the eschatology of Greek
legend hitherto followed by the poet, but which is drawn from
a philosophy destined to govern men’s thoughts of immortality
for many ages. In a wooded vale, far withdrawn, through
which Lethe glided peacefully, countless multitudes are
gathered drinking the <q>water of carelessness and oblivion.</q>
These are they, as Anchises expounds to his son, who, having
passed the thousand purgatorial years, to cleanse away the
stains of flesh in a former life, and, having effaced the memory
of it, now await the call of Destiny to a new life on earth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 748; cf. Conington’s <hi rend="italic">Virg.
Introd. Aen.</hi> vi. p. 419; Lobeck,
<hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> ii. 798.</note>
This theory of life and death, coming down from Pythagoras,
and popularised by Platonism, with some Stoic elements,
had gained immense vogue among educated men of the
last period of the Republic. Varro had adopted it as a
fundamental tenet of his theology, and Cicero had embalmed
it in his dream of Scipio, which furnished a text for Neo-Platonist
homilies in the last days of the Western Empire.<note place="foot">Diog. Laert. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Pythag.</hi> viii. 1,
§ 14;
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πρῶτόν τέ φασι τοῦτον ἀποφῆναι τὴν ψυχὴν κύκλον ἀνάγκης
ἀμείβουσαν ἄλλοτ’ ἄλλοις ἐνδεῖσθαι ζῴοις</foreign>: S. Aug.
<hi rend="italic">De Civ. D.</hi> vii. 6; cf. Liebaldt, <hi rend="italic">Theolog.
Varr.</hi> i. p. 14; Cic. <hi rend="italic">Rep.</hi> vi. 15-25;
Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 14.</note>
<pb n="494"/><anchor id="Pg494"/>A fiery spirit animates the material universe, from the farthest
star in ether down to the lowest form of animal life. The
souls of men are sparks or emanations from this general
soul which have descended into the prison of the body, and
during the period of their bondage have suffered contamination.<note place="foot">Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. 161, n. 1, 34, 312;
Cic. <hi rend="italic">De N. D.</hi> i. 11, 27; Pythagoras
qui censuit animum esse per naturam
rerum omnem intentum et commeantem,
ex quo nostri animi carperentur,
etc.</note>
And the prison walls hide from their eyes for a time
the heaven from which they come. Nor when death releases
them do they shake off the engrained corruption. For a
thousand years they must suffer cleansing by punishment till
the stains are washed away, the deeply festering taint burnt
out as by fire. Then only may the pure residue of ethereal
spirit seek to enter on another life on earth.
</p>

<p>
Virgil, in his Nekuia, mirrored the confusion of beliefs
as to the future state prevailing in his time. For his
poetic sensibility, the old Roman faith of the Manes, the
Greek legends of Tartarus and Elysium, the Pythagorean
or Orphic doctrine of successive lives and purgatorial
atonement, had each their charm, and a certain truth. On
a subject so dim and uncertain as the future life, the
keenest minds may have wavering conceptions, and in different
moods may clothe them in various guise. This is the field of
the protean poetic imagination inspired by religious intuition,
not of the rigorous dogmatist. But a great poet like Virgil
not only expresses an age to itself: he elevates and glorifies
what he expresses. He gives clear-cut form to what is vague,
he spreads the warmth and richness of colour over what is
dim and blank, and he imparts to the abstract teaching of
philosophy a glow and penetrating power which may touch
even the unthinking mass of men. The vision of the Sixth
Book, moreover, like the Aeneid as a whole, has a high note of
patriotism. Beside the water of Lethe are gathered, waiting
for their call to earthly life, all the great souls from the Alban
Silvius to the great Julius, all the Scipios, Gracchi, Decii, and
Fabricii, who were destined through storm and stress to give
the world the calm of the Roman peace.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> vi. 756 sqq.</note> The poet of Roman
destiny had a marvellous fame among his countrymen. Men
rose up to do him honour when he entered the theatre; the
<pb n="495"/><anchor id="Pg495"/>street boys of Pompeii scratched his verses on the walls.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iv. 2361, 1982; Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>,
486-8; Friedl. iii. p. 300.</note> Can
we doubt that the grandest part of his great poem, which lifts
for a moment the veil of the unseen world, had a profound
effect on the religious imagination of the future?
</p>

<p>
The opinion long prevailed that the period of the early
Empire was one of unbelief or scepticism as to the future life.
The opinion was founded on literary evidence accepted without
much critical care. Cicero and Seneca, Juvenal and Plutarch,<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad. Marc.</hi> xix. 4; Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi>
i. 21, 48; Juv. xiii. 48; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De
Superst.</hi> c. 4.</note>
had spoken of the Inferno of Greek legend, its Cerberus
and Chimaera, its gloom of Tartarus, as mere old wives’ fables,
in which even children had ceased to believe. But such
testimony should always be taken with a good deal of reserve.
The member of a comparatively small literary and thoughtful
circle is apt to imagine that its ideas are more widely diffused
than they really are. It may well have been that thoughtful
men, steeped in Platonic or Pythagorean faith as to the
coming life, rejected as anthropomorphic dreams the infernal
scenery of Greek legend, just as a thoughtful Christian
of our day will hardly picture his coming beatitude in the
gorgeous colouring of the Book of Revelation. Yet the mass
of men will always seek for concrete imagery to body forth
their dim spiritual cravings. They always live in that uncertain
twilight in which the boundaries of pictured symbolism
and spiritual reality are blurred and effaced. Lucian was a
pessimist as to spiritual progress, and he may have exaggerated
the materialistic superstition of his time; he had ample excuse
for doing so. Yet, artist as he was, his art would have
been futile and discredited in his own time, if it had not had
a solid background in widely accepted beliefs. And we cannot
refuse to admit his testimony that the visions of the grim
ferryman over the waters of Styx, the awful judge, the tortures
of Tartarus, the asphodel meads, and the water of Lethe, the
pale neutral shades who wandered expectant of the libation
on the grave, filled a large space in the imagination of the
crowd.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Luctu</hi>, cc. 1-10.</note> Plutarch, who sometimes agrees with Juvenal and
Seneca as to the general incredulity, at others holds that a
large class of remorseful sinners have a wholesome fear of the
<pb n="496"/><anchor id="Pg496"/>legendary tortures of lost souls, and that they are eager to
purge their guilt before the awful ordeal of the Eternal
Judgment.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Non p. Suav.</hi> c. 27.</note> And, however pure and etherealised his own views
may have been as to the life to come, no one has left a more
lurid picture of the flames, the gloom, the sounds of excruciating
anguish from the prison-house of the damned, which oppressed
the imagination of the multitude in his time. One part of
that vision had a peculiarly tenacious hold.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">De. Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> iv. 44;
<hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> c. 22.</note> The belief in
the gruff ferryman of the dead, who sternly exacted his fare,
and drove from the banks of Styx those who had no right to
cross the awful stream, was widely diffused and survived far
into the medieval times. For many centuries, long before and
long after the coming of Christ, the coin which was to secure
the passage of the shade into the world below was placed in
the mouth of the corpse.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">De Luctu</hi>, c. 10; Friedl. iii.
p. 632; Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, i. p. 306, n. 3;
Maury, <hi rend="italic">La Magie</hi>, p. 158.</note>
</p>

<p>
The inscriptions might be supposed to give authoritative
evidence as to the belief of ordinary men about the future
state. The funerary monuments from every part of the
Roman world are almost countless for the period of the early
Empire. Yet such records, however abundant, are not so
clear and satisfactory as they are by some taken to be.
The words of a tombstone are sometimes a sincere utterance
of real affection and faith. They are also not unfrequently
purely conventional, representing a respectable, historic creed,
which may not be that of the man who erects the slab. Just
as a Frenchman, who has never from infancy entered a church,
may have his wife interred with all the solemn forms with
which the Catholic Church makes the peace of the passing
soul, so the Roman pagan may have often inscribed on his
family tomb words which expressed the ancient creed of his
race rather than his personal belief. Heredity in religion is
a potent influence, and may be misleading to the inquirer of
a later age. An epitaph should not be construed as a confession
of faith.
</p>

<p>
The great mass of these inscriptions are couched in the
same phrases, with only slight variations. The dedication Dis
Manibus, representing the old Roman faith, is the heading of
<pb n="497"/><anchor id="Pg497"/>the majority of them. The vault is an <q>eternal home,</q> whose
peace is guarded by prayers or threats and entreaties. There
is a rare dedication to the <q>ashes</q> of the dead. There are
many to their <q>eternal repose.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4443.</note> But it is surely rather
absurd to find in expressions which occur almost in the same
form in the niches of the Catacombs a tinge of Epicureanism.
The poor grammarian of Como, who left all his substance
to his town, may be permitted to enjoy <q>the calm peace</q> he
claims after all the troubles of his life, without a suspicion
that he meant the peace of nothingness.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1197.</note> A pious Christian
may rejoice at escaping the miseries of old age, and even hail
death as the last cure of all mortal ills.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2982.</note> Death and sleep
have always seemed near akin, and when the Roman spoke of
the sleep of death, he probably did not often mean that it had
no awaking. The morning indeed, as we have seen, to old
imaginations was not very bright. <q>The day of eternity</q> was
not irradiated with the golden splendour of Pindar’s Happy
Isles; it was grey and sad and calm. But that it was felt
to be a real existence is shown by the insistent demand on
scores of monuments for the regular service of the living.
Every possible precaution is taken by the testator that his
family or his club shall maintain this sympathetic observance
for ever.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4433, 4416, 4417.</note> With the idea of prolonged existence, of course, is
blended the imaginative hope of having a continued memory
among men. And probably the majority of the funerary
inscriptions express this feeling chiefly. But the same is true
of the monuments of every age, and warrants no conclusion as
to the opinions about immortality held by those who raised
them. There is abundance of the purest affection expressed
on these memorials, and sometimes, although not very often,
there is the hope of reunion after death. The wife of a
<hi rend="italic">philologus</hi> at Narbonne confidently expects to meet him, or a
mother prays her son to take her to himself.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 4662, 4755.</note> Such expressions
of a natural feeling, the same from age to age, have really little
value as indications of religious belief. But there are not wanting
in the inscriptions references to Tartarus and the Elysian
fields, to Pluto and Proserpine, to Orcus who has snatched
away some one in his bloom. <q>One little soul has been
<pb n="498"/><anchor id="Pg498"/>received among the number of the gods.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4581, 4841, 4849, 4701,
7352.</note> There are others,
impregnated with the prevalent philosophy, which speak of
the soul returning to its source, or of being dissolved into the
infinite ether, or of passing to a distant home in the stars.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7392.</note>
This, however, as M. Boissier says,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 342.</note> must have been the dream
of a small minority. The funerary inscriptions leave the
impression that, down to the final triumph of the Church, the
feeling of the Romans about death was still in the main the
feeling of their remote ancestors of the Samnite and Punic
wars. It was a social feeling, in the prospect of a dim life
dependent on the memory of the living, a horror of loneliness
and desertion, the longing for a passing prayer even from a
stranger. Blessings are heaped on him who will not forget
the pious duty to the shade. On him who refuses it is invoked
the bitterest curse to Roman imagination—<q>May he die the
last of his race.</q>
</p>

<p>
But no dogmatic ecclesiastical system deterred the Roman
from expressing frankly his unbelief in any future state.
And the rejection of all hope for the future, sometimes coupled
with a coarse satisfaction with a sensual past, is the note of
not a few epitaphs of this period. Matrinia, the wife of one
C. Matrinius Valentius, an Epicurean philosopher, dedicates a
tablet to his <q>eternal sleep,</q> which in this case is no conventional
phrase.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1192.</note> And others, in even more decided language,
parade their withering faith that this brief life is only a
moment of consciousness between the blank of the past and
the blank of the future, and record their indifference at passing
again into the nothingness from which they came.
The formula is frequent—<q>Non fueram, non sum, nescio</q>; or
<q>Non fui, fui; non sum, non curo.</q> Another adds <q>non
mihi dolet.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7387, 4809, 4810, 4811, 4807,
4813, vixi dum vixi bene; jam mea
peracta mox vestra agetur fabula;
velete et plaudite, 7411.</note> The subjects of some of these epitaphs
seem to have obeyed literally the counsel of their master
Lucretius, though in a sense different from his, and to have
risen up sated with the banquet of life. They express, with
cynical grossness, their only faith in the joys of the flesh, and
their perfect content at having made the most of them.
<pb n="499"/><anchor id="Pg499"/><q>Balnea, Vina, Venus,</q> sums up the tale.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 4806, 7; 4; 4816, hic
secum habet omnia. Balnea, vina,
venus corrumpunt corpora nostra, set
vitam faciunt.</note> <q>What I have
eaten, what I have drunk, is my own. I have had my life.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7407.</note>
And the departing voluptuary exhorts his friends to follow his
example: <q>My friends, while we live, let us live</q>; <q>Eat,
drink, disport thyself, and then join us.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 1877.</note> A veteran of the
fifth legion records, probably with much truth, that <q>while
he lived he drank with a good will,</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6674, dum vixi bi(bi)
libenter; bibite vos qui vivitis.</note> and he exhorts his
surviving friends to drink while they live. Under the confessional
of St. Peter’s at Rome, in the year 1626, was found
a monument of one Agricola of Tibur and his wife. There
was a figure holding a wine-cup, and an inscription so frankly
sensual that the whole was destroyed by order of the Pope.
From the copy which was kept, it appears that Agricola was
perfectly satisfied with his life, and recommended his example
to others, <q>since it all ends in the grave or the funeral fire.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 7410—miscete Lyaeum, etc.,
caetera post obitum tellus consumit
et ignis.</note>
But inscriptions such as these are the exception. The funerary
records, as a whole, give a picture of a society very like our
own, with warm affections of kindred or friendship, clinging
to ancestral pieties, ready to hope, if sometimes not clear and
confident in faith.
</p>

<p>
There was probably a much more settled faith in immortality
among the ordinary masses than among the highly
educated. The philosophy of Greece came to the cultivated
Roman world with many different voices on the greatest
problem of human destiny. And the greatest minds, from
Cicero to M. Aurelius, reflect the discordance of philosophy.
Nay, some of those who, in more exalted moods, have left
glowing pictures of the future beatitude, have also at times
revealed a mood of melancholy doubt as to any conscious
future life. The prevailing philosophy in the last generation
of the Republic, demoralised by an internecine strife, was
that of Epicurus.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 312-316;
Thiersch, <hi rend="italic">Politik und Phil. in ihrem
Verhältn. zur Rel.</hi> p. 13.</note> It harmonised with the decay of old
Roman religion, and with the more disastrous moral deterioration
in the upper cultivated class. The cultivated patrician,
enervated by vice and luxury, or intoxicated with the
<pb n="500"/><anchor id="Pg500"/>excitement of civil war and the dreams of disordered ambition,
flung off all spiritual idealism, and accepted frankly a
lawless universe and a life of pleasure or power, to be ended
by death. The great poem of Lucretius, the greatest <hi rend="italic">tour de
force</hi> in Latin, if not in any literature, braving not only
the deepest beliefs of the Latin race, but the instinctive longings
of humanity, was a herculean attempt to relieve men
from the horrors of Graeco-Etruscan superstition. Even the
gay frivolity of the comic stage reveals the terror which the
path to Acheron inspired in the thoughtless crowd<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 310.</note>—the
terror from which, with all the fervid zeal of an evangelist,
Lucretius sought to relieve his countrymen.<note place="foot">Lucret. iii. 952, 991.</note> The pictures of
Tartarus had burnt themselves into the popular imagination.
And no message of Epicurus seems to his Roman interpreter
so full of peace and blessing as the gospel of nothingness after
death, the <q>morningless and unawakening sleep</q> which ends
the fretful fever of life. As we felt no trouble when the
storm of Punic invasion burst on Italy, we shall be equally
unconscious when the partnership of soul and body is dissolved,
even in the clash and fusion of all the elements in some great
cosmic change.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 844 sqq.</note> The older Stoicism permitted the hope of a
limited immortality until the next great cataclysm, in which,
after many ages, all things will be swallowed up.<note place="foot">Plut. (?) <hi rend="italic">De Plac. Phil.</hi> iv. 7,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οἱ Στωικοὶ ἐξιοῦσαν ἐκ τῶν σωμάτων ὑποφέρεσθαι, τὴν μὲν
ἀσθενεστέραν ἅμα τοῖς συγκρίμασι γενέσθαι· τὴν δὲ ἰσχυροτέραν,
οἵα ἐστὶ περὶ τοὺς σοφούς, καὶ μέχρι τῆς ἐκπυρώσεως</foreign>.</note> But
Chrysippus admitted this prolonged existence only for the
greater souls. And Panaetius, in the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, among
other aberrations from the old creed of his school, abandoned
even this not very satisfactory hope of immortality.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p.
185; Cic. <hi rend="italic">Tusc.</hi> i. 32, 79.</note> Aristotle,
while he held the permanence of the pure thinking principle
after death, had given little countenance to the hope of a
separate conscious personality. And the later Peripatetics,
like Alexander Aphrodisias, had gone farther even than
their master in dogmatic denial of immortality.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 1, p. 711, keine Seelenthätigkeit
ist ohne körperliche
Bewegung möglich; Renan, <hi rend="italic">Averroès</hi>,
pp. 128 sq., 418; Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii.
p. 309.</note> Whatever
support the instinctive craving of humanity for prolonged
existence could obtain from philosophy was offered by the
<pb n="501"/><anchor id="Pg501"/>Platonic and Neo-Pythagorean schools. And their influence
grew with the growing tendency to a revival of faith in the
supernatural. For Plato, with his intense belief in the divine
affinity of the human spirit, must always be the great leader
of those who seek in philosophy an interpreter and a champion
of religious intuition. The Phaedo was the last consolation of
many a victim of conscription or imperial tyranny. Its fine-spun
arguments may not have been altogether convincing, as
they hardly seem to be even to the Platonic Socrates. But Plato
was not merely a dialectician, he was also a seer and a poet.
And, on a subject so dim as immortality, where mere intellectual
proof, it is generally recognised, can be no more than
tentative and precarious, men with a deep spiritual instinct have
always felt the magnetism of the poet who could clothe his
intuitions in the forms of imagination, who, from a keener sensibility
and a larger vision, could give authority and clearness
to the spiritual intuitions of the race.<note place="foot">Cf. Graham, <hi rend="italic">Creed of Science</hi> (2nd
ed.), p. 183, <q>The poets must count
for much in the argument, since they
possess in higher degree than others
the great creative faculty of imagination
which outlines the province of
the possible</q>; Jowett, <hi rend="italic">Plato</hi>, i. pp.
389 sqq., etc.</note> The philosophy of the
Porch gave to the Antonine age some of its loftiest characters.
But it was not the philosophy of the future. It was too cold,
and too self-centred. It had too little warmth of sympathy
with religious instincts which were becoming more and more
imperious. Although, as we have seen in Seneca, it was softened
by elements borrowed from Platonic sources, in Epictetus and
M. Aurelius, in spite of a rare spiritual elevation, it displays
the old aloofness from the mass of men, and a cold temperance
of reserve on the great question of the future of the soul.
</p>

<p>
There can be little doubt that in the last age of the Republic
a negative philosophy conspired with a decaying religious sense
to stifle the hope of immortality among the cultivated class.
Lucretius was certainly not a solitary member of his order.
His great poem, by its combination of dialectic subtlety, poetic
charm, and lofty moral earnestness, may have made many
converts to its withering creed. In the debate on the fate of
the Catilinarian conspirators, Julius Caesar could assert, without
fear of contradiction or disapproval, that death was the final
term alike of joy and sorrow in human life.<note place="foot">Sall. <hi rend="italic">Catil.</hi> c. 51.</note> This philosophy,
<pb n="502"/><anchor id="Pg502"/>indeed, was waning in force in the time of Augustus, and its
forces were spent before the close of the first century. Yet
the elder Pliny, who saw the reign of Vespasian, inveighs
almost fiercely against the vanity or madness which dreams of
a phantom life beyond the tomb, and robs of its great charm
the last kindly boon of nature.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> vii. 55, 188.</note> Seneca on this, as on many
other questions of high moment, is not steady and consistent.
In moments of spiritual exaltation he is filled with apocalyptic
rapture at the vision of an eternal world. At other times he
speaks with a cold resignation, which seems to have been the
fashion with men of his class and time, at the possibility of
extinction in death. To the toil-worn spirit, weary of the
travail and disappointments of life, death will be a quiet haven
of rest.<note place="foot">Cf. Plut. (?) <hi rend="italic">Cons. ad Apoll.</hi> c. xii.
xiii.</note> The old terrors of Charon and Cerberus, of the
awful Judge and the tortures of Tartarus, are no longer
believed in even by children.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> c. xix.</note> And stripped of its mythic
horrors, death, being the loss of consciousness, must be the
negation of pain and desire and fear. It is, in fact, a return
to the nothingness from which we come, which has left
no memory. <hi rend="italic">Non miser potest esse qui nullus est.</hi><note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 54, 99, § 30; <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> vi.
§ 6; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> 25.</note> The
literary men and men of the world in the age of the Flavians,
like their successors ever since, probably occupied themselves
little with a problem so long debated and so variously solved.
Quintilian treats the question of the existence of the disembodied
spirit as an open one for dialectical debate.<note place="foot">Quint. <hi rend="italic">Inst.</hi> v. 14, 13, cum, soluta
corpore anima an sit immortalis vel ad
tempus certe maneat, sit in dubio.</note> Tacitus,
at once credulous and sceptical, is no clearer on the subject of
immortality than he is on the subject of miracles, or omens, or
Providence. In his eulogy on Agricola he expresses a faint,
pious hope of eternal peace for his hero, if there is a place in
some other world for pious shades, and the sages are right
in thinking that great souls do not perish with the body.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Agric.</hi> c. 46; cf. Rohde,
<hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. p. 318, n. 3.</note>
This is a very guarded and hypothetical hope; and, probably,
the only immortality for his friend in which Tacitus had much
confidence was the undying fame with which the pen of
genius can invest its subject. Tacitus, like so many of his
<pb n="503"/><anchor id="Pg503"/>class, had the old Roman distrust of philosophy, and the
philosophies of which men of his generation had a tincture
had no very confident or comforting message about the soul’s
eternal destiny.
</p>

<p>
Hadrian, the most interesting of the emperors, was probably
a sceptic on this as on all kindred subjects. The
greatest practical genius in the imperial line had, in the field
of religion and speculation, an infinite passion for all that was
curious and exotic.<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 13, § 3; 14, § 3;
17, § 9; cf. Gregorovius, p. 303.</note> Tramping at the head of his legions
through his world-wide domains, he relieved the tedium of
practical administration by visiting the scenes of historic
fame or the homes of ancient religion both in the East and
West. The East particularly attracted him by its infinite
fecundity of superstition. He came to see whether there was
anything in these revelations of the unseen world; he went
away to mock at them. His insatiable curiosity had an endless
variety of moods, and offered an open door to all the influences
from many creeds. The restorer of ancient shrines, the
admirer of Epictetus, the dabbler in astrology, the votary of
Eleusis<note place="foot">Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> 13, § 1.</note> and all the mysteries of the East, the munificent
patron of all professors of philosophy and the arts, the
man who delighted also to puzzle and ridicule them,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 15, § 12; 16, § 8.</note> had
probably few settled convictions of his own. His last words
to his soul, in their mingled lightness and pathos, seem to
express rather regret for the sunlight left behind than any
hope in entering on a dim journey into the unknown.
</p>

<p>
The Antonine age was for the masses an age of growing
faith, and yet three or four of its greatest minds, men who
had drunk deep of philosophy, or who had a rare spiritual
vision, either denied or doubted the last hope of humanity.
Epictetus came from Phrygia as the slave of a freedman of
Nero.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1,
p. 660 n.</note> Even in his days of slavery, he had absorbed the
teaching of Musonius.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 6, § 10.</note> He received his freedom, but lived
in poverty and physical infirmity till, in the persecution of
Domitian’s reign he was, with the whole tribe of philosophic
preachers, driven from Rome,<note place="foot">A. Gell. xv. 11.</note> and he settled at Nicopolis in
Epirus, where Arrian heard his discourses on the higher life.
<pb n="504"/><anchor id="Pg504"/>According to Hadrian’s biographer, he lived in the greatest
intimacy with that emperor.<note place="foot">Ael. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 16.</note> He refers more than once to
the reign of Trajan,<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iv. 5, § 17.</note> but it is hardly possible that the tradition
is true which carries his life into the reign of M. Aurelius,
although the great philosophic emperor owed much to his
teaching.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. i. 7,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ τὸ ἐντυχεῖν τοῖς Ἐπικτητείοις ὑπομνήμασιν ὧν οἴκοθεν μετέδωκε</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Epictetus is an example of a profoundly religious mind, to
whom personal immortality is not a necessity of his religion.
The great law of life is glad submission to the will of God, to
the universal order. Death, as an event which is bound to
come soon or late, should be regarded without fear. The
tremors it excites are like the shuddering of children at a tragic
mask of Gorgon or Fury. Turn the mask, and the terror is
gone.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> ii. 1, § 17.</note> For what is death? A separation of soul and body,
a dissolution of our frame into the kindred elements.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 24, § 93; cf. M. Aurel. iv.
14, 21, and Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. 330.</note> The
door is opened, God calls you to come, and to no terrible
future. Hades, Acheron, and Cocytus are mere childish
fancies.<note place="foot">Epict. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> iii. 13, § 15.</note> You will pass into the wind or earth or fire from
which you come. You will not exist, but you will be something
else of which the world now has need, just as you came
into your present existence when the world had need of you.
God sent you here subject to death, to live on earth a little
while in the flesh, to do His will and serve His purpose, and
join in the spectacle and festival. But the spectacle for you
is ended; go hence whither He leads, with adoration and gratitude
for all that you have seen and heard. Make room for
others who have yet to be born in accordance with His will.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> § 14,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὅταν δὲ μὴ παρέχῃ τἀναγκαῖα, τὸ ἀνακλητικὸν σημαίνει,
τὴν θύραν ἤνοιξε, καὶ λέγει σοι, Ἔρχου, Ποῦ; Εἰς οὐδὲν δεινόν·
ἀλλ’ ὅθεν ἐγένου, εἰς τὰ φίλα καὶ συγγενῆ, εἰς τὰ στοιχεῖα</foreign>.</note>
Language like this seems to give slight hope of any personal,
conscious life beyond the grave. Epictetus, like the pious
Hebrew of many of the Psalms, seems to be satisfied with
the present vision of God, whether or not there be any fuller
vision beyond the veil. Yet he elsewhere uses almost Platonic
language, which seems to imply that the soul has a separate
life, that it is a prisoner for a time in the bonds of the flesh,
and that it passes at death to the kindred source from which
<pb n="505"/><anchor id="Pg505"/>it sprang.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> i. 9, § 14,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἄφες ἡμᾶς ἀπελθεῖν ὅθεν ἐληλύθαμεν κτλ.</foreign></note> Yet even here the hope of an individual immortality,
of any future reproduction on a higher scale of the life
on earth, need not be implied; it is indeed probably absent.
It is enough for the profoundly religious spirit of Epictetus that
God calls us; whither He calls us must be left to His will.
</p>

<p>
Galen the physician shows a similar detachment from
the ordinary hopes of humanity as to a future life, although
it springs from a very different environment and training
from those of Epictetus. Born in the reign of Hadrian,
and dying in the reign of Septimius Severus, Galen represents
the religious spirit of the Antonine age in his firm belief
in a spiritual Power and Providence.<note place="foot">Überweg, <hi rend="italic">Hist. Phil.</hi> i. p. 237.</note> But in philosophy
he was an eclectic of the eclectics. His medical studies
began at the age of seventeen. The influence of the Platonist,
Albinus of Smyrna, above all his stay at Alexandria, while
they gave him a wide range of sympathy, account for
the mingled and heterogeneous character of his philosophic
creed, which contains elements from every system except that
of Epicurus.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 1, p. 735.</note> The result is a curious hesitation and equipoise
between conflicting opinions on the greatest questions. He is
particularly uncertain as to the nature of the soul and its
relation to the body. The Platonic doctrine that the soul is
an immaterial essence, independent of corporeal support, seems
to Galen very disputable. How can immaterial essences have
any separate individuality? How can they diffuse themselves
over a corporeal frame and alter and excite it, as in lunacy
or drunkenness? And again, if the Peripatetic doctrine be
true, that the soul is the <q>form</q> of the body, we are soon
landed in the Stoic materialism from which Galen shrank.
The soul will become, as in the well-known theory refuted in
the Phaedo,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi>, 86 <hi rend="small">B</hi>.</note> a <q>temperament</q> of bodily states, and its superior
endurance, its immortality, will become a baseless dream. On
these great questions the cautious man of science will not
venture to come to any dogmatic conclusion.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 1, p. 740; Überweg, <hi rend="italic">Hist.
Phil.</hi> i. p. 237.</note>
</p>

<p>
Galen came to Rome in the year 164, at the beginning of
the reign of M. Aurelius. He soon rose to great fame in his
profession, and when, in 168, he had returned to his native
<pb n="506"/><anchor id="Pg506"/>Pergamum, he was recalled by the emperors to meet them at
Aquileia. It was an anxious time. It was the second year
of the campaign against the Marcomanni, and the legions,
returning with Verus from the East, had brought with them
the taint of a pestilence which spread a desolation throughout
Italy from which it did not recover for ages. The slaves
were called to arms as in the Punic invasion, along with the
gladiators, and even the brigands of Dalmatia, and the massing
of the forces on the Adriatic only concentrated the malignity
of the plague.<note place="foot">Jul. Capit. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. 13; c. 21;
cf. Merivale, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Hist.</hi> viii. pp. 335-6.</note> Galen remained with the army for some
time, lending his skill to mitigate the horrors of the disease.
He returned to Rome in 170, and was left there in charge of
the youthful Commodus. The philosophic Emperor and his
philosophic physician must have often met in those dreadful
years. And we may be sure, from the detachment of
M. Aurelius, that their conversations would take a wider
range than the sanitary arrangements of the camp. With
death in the air, how could two such men, trained under such
masters, fail to question one another as to the sequel of death?
At any rate the fact remains that M. Aurelius on this question
is as submissive as Epictetus, as hesitating as Galen.
</p>

<p>
M. Aurelius is commonly spoken of as realising Plato’s
dream of the philosopher on the throne. And yet the
description is, without some additions and explanations, somewhat
misleading. Philosopher, in the large speculative sense,
he certainly is not in his Meditations. For the infinite
curiosity of intellect, the passion to pierce the veil of the
unknown, to build a great cosmic system, he seems to have
had but little sympathy.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vii. 67; Zeller, iii. 1, p. 677.</note> His is the crowning instance of
philosophy leaving the heights and concentrating itself on conduct,
which becomes not merely <q>three-fourths of life,</q> but the
whole, and his philosophy is really a religion. It is a religion
because it is founded on the great principle of unquestioning,
uncomplaining submission to the will of God, the law of the
whole universe. It is a religion because the repellent and
rigorous teaching of the older Stoicism is, as it is in Epictetus,
suffused with a glow of emotion.<note place="foot">M. Arnold, <hi rend="italic">Essays in Criticism</hi>, p. 427.</note> And yet this religion, which
<pb n="507"/><anchor id="Pg507"/>makes such immense demands on human nature, cuts itself off
from any support in the hope of a future life.
</p>

<p>
On the subject of immortality, indeed, M. Aurelius sometimes
seems to waver. He puts the question hypothetically,
or he suggests immortality as an alternative to extinction
at death. <q>If thou goest indeed to another life, there is no
want of gods, not even there. But if to a state without
sensation, thou wilt cease to be held by pains and pleasures,
and to be a slave to the vessel.</q><note place="foot">M. Aurel. iii. 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἰ δὲ ἐν ἀναισθησίᾳ, παύσῃ πόνων καὶ ἡδονῶν ἀνεχόμενος,
καὶ λατρεύων τοσούτῳ χείρονι τῷ ἀγγείῳ ἢ περίεστι
τὸ ὑπηρετοῦν</foreign>: Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>,
ii. pp. 327-28.</note> In one doubtful passage he
speaks of <q>the time when the soul shall fall out of this
envelop, like the child from the womb.</q><note place="foot">ix. 3,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὕτως ἐνδέχεσθαι τὴν ὥραν ἐν ᾓ τὸ ψυχάριόν σου τοῦ ἐλύτρου
τούτου ἐκπεσεῖται</foreign>.</note> He does not dogmatise
on a subject so dark. But his favourite conception
of death is that of change, of transformation, of dissolution
into the original elements. An Infinite Spirit, of which the
individual soul is an emanation, pervades the universe, and at
death the finite spirit is reabsorbed by the Infinite.<note place="foot">xii. 30-32.</note> With this
is coupled the doctrine of the dark Ephesian philosophy, which
through Platonism had a profound influence on later thought.
Life is but a moment of consciousness in the unresting flow of
infinite mutation;<note place="foot">vi. 42, 47; ix. 29, 32; vi. 15; vii.
19; vi. 36, 
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πᾶν τὸ ἐνεστὼς τοῦ χρόνου, στιγμὴ τοῦ αἰῶνος</foreign>: Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii.
p. 147.</note> it is a dream, a mere vapour, the sojourn of
a passing stranger. And the last thought of Aurelius probably
was that there was no place for a hope of separate conscious
existence after the last mortal change. Soul and body alike
are swept along the stream of perpetual transformation, and
this particular <q>ego,</q> with all its dreams and memories, will
never re-emerge in a separate personality.
</p>

<p>
M. Aurelius, from the frequency with which he returns to
the subject, seems fully conscious of the instinctive passion
for continued life. But he refuses to recognise it as original
and legitimate, and therefore demanding some account to be
given of it.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vi. 49,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μήτι δυσχεραίνεις ὅτι τοσῶνδέ τινων λιτρῶν εἶ καὶ οὐ
    τριακοσίων; οὕτω δὲ καὶ ὅτι μέχρι τοσῶνδε ἐτῶν βιωτέον
σοι καὶ οὐ μέχρι πλείονος</foreign>.</note> Still less would he ever dream of erecting it, as
Cicero and Plutarch did, into a powerful argument for some
corresponding satisfaction in another world. It is simply one
<pb n="508"/><anchor id="Pg508"/>of the irrational appetites, a form of rebellion against the
universal order, which must be crushed and brought into submission
to inexorable law.  Neither do we find in M. Aurelius
any feeling of the need for a rectification of the injustices of
time, for any sphere for the completion of ineffectual lives,
where the crooked may be made straight and the perverted
be restored. He has, apparently, no sympathy with the sadness
so often felt by the noblest minds, at having to go hence with
so little done, so little known. The philosopher seems to have
no wish to explore in some coming life the secrets of the
universe, to prolong under happier conditions the endless quest
of the ideal in art and knowledge and thought, which seems so
cruelly baffled by the shortness of the life here below. The
affectionate father and husband and friend seems to have no
dream of any reunion with kindred souls. Above all, this
intensely religious and devout spirit seems to have no conception,
such as sometimes flashes on the mind of Seneca and of
Plutarch, of a future beatitude in the full vision of God.
This austere renunciation, if it was deliberate, of feelings and
hopes so dear to humanity, excites a certain admiration, as
the result of a stern self-discipline. It is the resignation
of what are thought to be mere fond, self-flattering fancies
in the cold light of truth, and, as such, it must ever command
a reverent respect. Yet how completely the renunciation
cuts off M. Aurelius from the spiritual movement of his time,
from the great onward sweep of humanity to a spiritual
reconstruction!
</p>

<p>
The attitude of M. Aurelius to the instinctive longing for
immortality is partly dictated by logical loyalty to the fundamental
principles of his theory of life, partly by personal
temperament and sad experience. The cosmic theory of
Heraclitus, the infinite flux of cyclic change, left little ground
for faith in the permanence of consciousness. The Stoic
principle of submission to the law of the whole made it a duty
to acquiesce calmly, or even cheerfully, in what has been
ordained for us. The whole duty, the sole blessedness of man,
lie in bringing his will into conformity with the Eternal
Reason, and in moulding this brief mundane life into a slight
counterpart of the order of the mighty world. From one
point of view the single human life is infinitely small, a mere
<pb n="509"/><anchor id="Pg509"/>point in infinite age,<note place="foot">M. Aurel. ix. 32,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀχανὲς δὲ τὸ πρὸ τὴς γενέσεως ὡς καὶ τὸ μετὰ
τὴν διάλυσιν ὁμοίως ἄπειρον</foreign>.</note> agitated by hopes and fears which are
mere flitting dreams of a momentary consciousness. Nay,
the grandest features of its earthly home shrink to mean
proportions before the eye of reason. Asia is a mere corner,
the sea a drop, Athos a tiny clod in the universe.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 36,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἡ Ἀσία, ἡ Εὐρώπη, γωνίαι τοῦ κόσμου ... Αθως
βωλάριον τοῦ κόσμου</foreign>.</note> Life is so
little a thing that death is no evil.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 35.</note> Yet, looked at on another
side, the daemon, the divine spark within each of us, may, by
its irresistible power, create a moral whole in each human
spirit which, during its short space of separate being, may
have the rounded harmony and perfectness of the whole vast
order—it may become a perfect miniature of the universe of
God.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x. 33; v. 11; v. 27.</note> This consummate result, attainable, though so rarely
attained, is the ideal which alone gives dignity to human life.
The ideal of humanity lies not in any future life or coming
age; it may be, were the will properly aroused to its divine
strength, realised here and now in our short span of forty years
of maturity.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xi. 1.</note> Get rid of gross fears and hopes, aim only at
the moral ends which the will, aided by the daemon within,
can surely reach, dismiss the fear of censure from the ephemeral
crowd around us, the craving for fame among ephemeral
generations whom we shall not see,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 16; vi. 2; vi. 51; vii. 21,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐγγὺς μὲν ἡ σὴ περὶ πάντων λήθη ἐγγὺς δὲ ἡ πάντων περὶ σοῦ λήθη</foreign>.</note> let the divine impulse
within us gravitate to its proper orbit, and this poor human life
is swept into the eternal movement of the great whole, and,
from a moment of troubled consciousness, becomes a true life
in God. Such a life, having fulfilled the true law of its being,
is in itself rounded and complete: it needs no dreams of
future beatitude to rectify its failures or reward its eager
effort. Death to such a soul becomes an unimportant incident,
fixed, like all other changes, in the general order. And
the length or shortness of life is not worth reckoning. The
longest life is hardly a moment in eternity: the shortest is
long enough if it be lived well. This life, as fixed by eternal
law, is a whole, a thing by itself, a thing with innumerable
counterparts in the infinite past, destined to be endlessly
reproduced in the years of the limitless future.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xi. 1; vii. 1.</note> To repine at
<pb n="510"/><anchor id="Pg510"/>its shortness is no more rational than to mourn the swift
passing of a springtime, whose glorious promise, yet ever-withering
charm, have come and gone in the self-same way
through myriads of forgotten years.
</p>

<p>
This is the ideal view of an austere creed, with a grandeur
of its own which all generations of the West have agreed to
venerate. But the temperament and the history of M. Aurelius
had also their share in shaping his views of life and death.
With infinite charity, indulgence, and even love for his fellows,
he was a pessimist about human life.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vi. 46, 47; vii. 3; ix. 30.</note> He had good excuse
for being so. In the words of one who knew that age as only
genius combined with learning can, <hi rend="italic">le monde s’attristait</hi>; and
with good cause. The horizon was darkened with ominous
thunder-clouds. The internal forces of the Empire were becoming
paralysed by a mysterious weakness. The dim hordes beyond
the Danube had descended with a force only to be repelled in
many weary campaigns. Famine and pestilence were inflicting
worse horrors than the Marcomanni. It was the beginning of
the end, although the end was long deferred. The world was
growing sad; but there was no sadder man than the saintly
Stoic on the throne, who had not only to face the Germans on
the Danube, and bear the anxieties of solitary power, but who
had to endure the keener anguish of a soul which saw the
spiritual possibilities of human nature, but also all its littleness
and baseness. The Emperor needed all the lessons of self-discipline
and close-lipped resignation which he had painfully
learnt for himself, and which he has taught to so many generations.
There have been few nobler souls, yet few more hopeless.
Like the arch mocker of the time, although from a very
different point of view, he sees this ephemeral life, with its
transient pleasures and triumphs, ending in dust and oblivion.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 47; cf. Luc. <hi rend="italic">Icaromenippus</hi>,
c. 18; <hi rend="italic">Traj. sive Tyr.</hi> c. 8; <hi rend="italic">Charon</hi>, c.
17; <hi rend="italic">Menip.</hi> c. 15,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀλλ’ ὅμοια τὰ ὀστᾶ ἦν, ἄδηλα καὶ ἀνεπίγραφα κτλ.</foreign></note>
And its fragility is only matched by its weary sameness from
age to age. The wintry torrent of endless mutation sweeps
all round in an eternal vortex.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. vii. 19,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διὰ τῆς τῶν ὅλων οὐσίας, ὡς διὰ χειμάρρου, διεκπορεύεται
    πάντα τὰ σώματα</foreign>. Cf. ix. 29,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">χειμάρρους ἡ τῶν πάντων αἰτία· πάντα φέρει</foreign>.</note> This restless change is a
movement of cyclic monotony.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 49; vii. 1; ix. 14; x. 23;
xi. 1.</note> Go back to Vespasian or
<pb n="511"/><anchor id="Pg511"/>Trajan: you will find the same recurring spectacle, men
plotting and fighting, marrying and dying.<note place="foot">M. Aurel. iv. 32.</note> The daughter
who watches by her mother’s death-bed soon passes away under
other eyes. The soul can in vision travel far, and survey the
infinity of ages.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xi. 1.</note> It can stretch forward into the endless ages
to come, as it can go back in historic imagination through the
limitless past. Yet it finds nothing strange in the experience
of the past, as there will be nothing new in the experience
of our remotest posterity. The man whose course has run for
forty years, if he has any powers of perception, has concentrated
in his brief span the image of all that has been, all that ever
will be in human thought or fate. The future is not gilded
by any dream of progress: it is not to be imaged in any magic
light of a Platonic Utopia, or City of God descending from
heaven like a bride.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ix. 29,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μηδὲ τὴν Πλάτωνος πολιτείαν ἔλπιζε, ἀλλ’ ἀρκοῦ εἰ τὸ
βραχύτατον πρόεισι</foreign>.</note> From this <q>terrene filth,</q> from these
poor frivolous souls, what celestial commonwealth could ever
emerge?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vii. 47; ix. 34.</note> The moral is, both on the ground of high philosophy
and sad experience—<q>be content, thou hast made thy voyage,
thou hast come to shore, quit the ship.</q>
</p>

<p>
But even in heathendom, long before M. Aurelius was born,
the drift of thought towards the goal of a personal immortality
was strong and intense. And this was only one consequence
of a movement which had profoundly affected human thought,
and had compelled Stoicism to recast itself, as in the teaching of
Seneca. Pure reason could not explain the relation of man to
the universe, it could not satisfy the deepest human instincts.
The maxim, <q>live according to Nature,</q> was interpreted by the
Stoic to mean a life in accordance with our own higher nature, the
Divine element within us. Yet this interpretation only brought
out the irreconcilable discordance between the two conceptions
of Nature in the physical universe and in the human spirit.
There are depths and mysteries in the one which have no
answering correspondence in the other. Something more than
reason is needed to solve the problems of human destiny, the
mysterious range of human aspiration. Nature, as a system
of cold impersonal processes, has no sympathy with man, she
may be icily indifferent or actively hostile. To conform one’s
<pb n="512"/><anchor id="Pg512"/>life to the supposed dictates of an abstract Reason, asserting
itself in physical laws, which seem often to make a mockery
of the noblest effort and aspiration of man, demanded a servility
of submission in human nature, and called upon it to disown a
large part of its native powers and instincts. Man, a mere
ghost of himself, attenuated to a bloodless shade, finds himself
in presence of a power cold, relentless, unmoral, according to
human standards, a power which makes holocausts of individual
lives to serve some abstract and visionary ideal of the whole.
The older Stoicism provided no object of worship. For worship
cannot be paid to an impersonal law without moral attributes.
You may in abject quietism submit to it, but you cannot revere
or adore it. It is little wonder that the Stoic sage, who could
triumph over all material obstructions by moral enthusiasm,
was sometimes exalted above the Zeus who represented mere
passionless physical law. Such an idea—for it cannot be
called a Being—has no moral import, it supplies no example,
succour, or inspiration. The sage may for a moment have
a superhuman triumph, in his defiance of the temptations
or calamities with which Nature has surrounded him, but it
is a lonely triumph of inhuman pride.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 109, § 9.</note> It may be the divine
element within him which has given him the victory, but this
is conceived as the mere effluence of that subtle material force
which moves under all the phenomena of physical Nature.
In surrendering yourself to the impulse of such a power you
are merely putting yourself in line with the other irrational
subjects of impersonal law. There is here, it need not be said,
no stimulus to moral life, there is the absolute negation of it.
The affinity of the human soul with the soul of the world is a
mere physical doctrine, however refined and subtle be the <q>fiery
breath</q> which is the common element of both. But prolonged
ethical study and analysis combined with the infiltration of
Platonism by degrees to modify profoundly the Stoic conception
of the nature of God, and of the relation of man to Him.
God tended to become more and more a person, a moral power,
a father. And the indwelling God became the voice of
conscience, consoling, prompting, supporting, inspiring an
ideal of fuller communion in another sphere. Was the
longing for continued life, in communion with kindred souls,
<pb n="513"/><anchor id="Pg513"/>with a Divine Spirit, which has made us what we are, to be
relegated to the limbo of anthropomorphic dreams?
</p>

<p>
Seneca, as we have seen in a former chapter, still retains
some of the hard orthodoxy of the older Stoicism. In his
letters to Lucilius he occasionally uses the language of the
old Stoic materialism.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 57, § 7.</note> But there can be little doubt that
Seneca had assimilated other conceptions antagonistic to it.
God becomes more a Person, distinct from the world, which
He has created, which He governs, which He directs to
moral ends.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 73, § 16; <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 83.</note> He is not merely the highest reason, He is
also the perfect wisdom, holiness, and love. He is no longer
a mere blind force or fate; He is the loving, watchful Father,
and good men are His sons. The apparent calamities which
they have to suffer are only a necessary discipline, for, <q>whom
He loves He tries and hardens by chastisement.</q><note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">De Prov.</hi> iv. § 7, quos amat
indurat, exercet.</note> God can
never really injure, for His nature is love, and we are continually
loaded with His benefits.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">De Ben.</hi> iv. 4; <hi rend="italic">De Ira</hi>, ii. 27.</note> In his view of the constitution of
man, Seneca has deviated even further from the creed of his
school. He appears indeed to assert sometimes that the soul
is material, but it is matter so fine and subtle as to be indistinguishable
from what we call spirit. And the ethical studies
of Seneca compelled him to abandon the Stoic doctrine of the
simple unity of the soul for the Platonic dualism, with the
opposition of reason and animal impulse. The latter has its
seat in the body, or the flesh, as he often calls it. And of the
flesh he speaks with all the contempt of the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi>. It is a
mere shell, a fetter, a prison; or a humble hostelry which the
soul occupies only for a brief space.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 65, § 22; 102, § 26;
    <hi rend="italic"><anchor id="corr513"/><corr sic="Ad.">Ad</corr>
Helv.</hi> 11, § 7; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> 24, § 5. Cf.
Plat. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 83 <hi rend="small">C, D</hi>. Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll.
Tyan.</hi> vi. 11; vii. 26.</note> With the flesh the spirit
must wage perpetual war, as the alien power which cramps its
native energies, darkens its vision, and perverts its judgment
of the truth. The true life of the spirit will, as in the theology
of Plato, only begin when the unequal partnership is dissolved.<note place="foot">Plat. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 79 <hi rend="small">C</hi>; 81 <hi rend="small">A</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The orthodox Stoic doctrine allowed a limited immortality,
till the next great cosmic conflagration. But it was doubtful
whether even this continued existence was real personal life,
and with some Stoic doctors it was a privilege confined to the
<pb n="514"/><anchor id="Pg514"/>greater souls.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 1, p. 185.</note> Like nearly all philosophers of this age, Seneca
occasionally seems to admit the possibility of a return to antenatal
nothingness at death. <q>Non potest miser esse qui nullus
est</q> is a consolation often administered even by those who
have the hope of something better than the peace of annihilation.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> c. 19, 20; cf. Plut. (?)
<hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. 15,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν οὖν τάξιν οἱ τελευτήσαντες καθίστανται
    τῇ πρὸ τῆς γενέσεως</foreign>: cf. <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> c. 34.</note>
It was a consolation which might be a very real one
to men living in the reign of Nero. Taken at the worst, death
can only be dissolution, for the rivers of fire and the tortures
of Tartarus are mere figments of poetic fancy. The mind
trained in submission to universal law will not shrink from a
fate which awaits the universe by fire or cataclysmal change.
Its future fate can only be either to dwell calmly for ever
among kindred souls, or to be reabsorbed into the general
whole.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 36; 71, § 12; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi>
19, § 4. Cf. Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. p. 328.</note> But in moments of spiritual exaltation, such an
alternative does not satisfy Seneca. He has got far beyond
the grim submission, or graceful contempt, of aristocratic suicide,
or even the faith in a bounded immortality. He has a hope
at times apparently more clear than any felt by the Platonic
Socrates on the last evening in prison. Death is no longer a
sleep, a blank peace following the futile agitations of life: it
is the gateway to eternal peace. The brief sojourn in the body
is the prelude to a longer and nobler life.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 102, § 21.</note> The hour, at which
you shudder as the last, is really the birthday of eternity,
when the mind, bursting from its fetters, will expatiate in
all the joy of its freedom in the light, and have unrolled
before it all the secrets and splendour of starry worlds, without
a haunting shadow.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 120, § 14; 102, § 28,
aliquando naturae tibi arcana retegentur:
discutietur ista caligo ...
nulla serenum umbra turbabit, cf.
Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. p. 328, n. 4. Rohde,
like Zeller, seems to me not to recognise
sufficiently how far Seneca has departed
from the old Stoicism.</note> Nay, the vision is moralised almost in
Christian fashion. The thought of eternity compels us to think
of God as witness of every act, to remember that <q>decisive
hour</q> when, with all veils and disguises removed, the verdict
on our life will be pronounced. It also gives the hope of
purging away for ever the taint of the flesh and entering on
communion with the spirits of the blessed.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 26, § 5; <hi rend="italic">Ad Marc.</hi> xxv.</note> Thus as though
<pb n="515"/><anchor id="Pg515"/>with the Eternal eyes upon him, a man should shrink from all
the baser and meaner side of his corporeal life, and so prepare
himself for the great ordeal, and the beatitude of the life to
come.
</p>

<p>
In the apocalypse of Seneca a new note is struck in pagan
meditation on the immortality. We have left far behind the
thought of the Manes haunting the ancestral tomb, and soothed
in returning years by the jet of wine or the bunch of violets.
We are no longer watching, with Pindar or Virgil, the spirits
basking in Elysian meads and fanned by ocean breezes. We
are far on the way to the City of God, <hi rend="italic">cujus fundamenta in
montibus sanctis</hi>. And indeed Seneca has probably travelled
as far towards it as any one born in heathendom ever did.
It is not wonderful that, in the fierce religious struggle of the
fourth century, his moral enthusiasm, his view of this life as a
probation for the next, his glowing vision of an almost Christian
heaven, should have suggested an imaginary intercourse with
St Paul.<note place="foot">See the apocryphal letters, p. 477,
of Haase’s ed. of Sen.; cf. Lightfoot,
<hi rend="italic">S. Paul’s Ep. to the Philippians</hi>, p.
268 sqq. Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii.
1, p. 637, n. 1; Baur, <hi rend="italic">Ch. Hist.</hi> i. p. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
What were the influences which really moulded his
highest conception of the future state, how much was due
to a pure and vigorous spiritual intuition, how much to
Platonic and Pythagorean sources, we cannot pretend to say.
In Seneca’s most enraptured previsions of immortality, the
very exuberance of the rhetoric seems to be the expression of
intense personal feeling. But Seneca’s was a very open and
sensitive mind. One of his teachers was Sotion, who, like his
master Sextius, was called a Pythagorean, and who, on true
Pythagorean principles, taught Seneca to abstain from animal
food.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, § 17; cf. Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 7, 8.</note> We may be sure that no Pythagorean teacher of that age
would fail to discuss with his pupil the problem of the future
life. It is true that Seneca only once or twice alludes to the
doctrine of a previous life, and he only mentions the Pythagorean
school to record the fact that in his day it was without a head.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Nat. Qu.</hi> vii. 32, § 2, Pythagorica
illa invidiosa turbae schola praeceptorem
non invenit.</note>
But that does not preclude the supposition that he may have
felt its influence in the formative years of youth. And the
Pythagoreans of the early empire were a highly eclectic school.
<pb n="516"/><anchor id="Pg516"/>They still reproduced the spirit of their founder in mathematical
symbolism, in the ideal of asceticism, in a pronounced religious
tendency.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2, p. 95.</note> But they had absorbed much from Platonism, as
well as from the Lyceum and the Porch. These mingled influences
also account for the profound alterations which Stoicism
had undergone in the mind of Seneca. And his contempt for
the body or the flesh, and many of the phrases in which its
cramping, lowering influences are described, savour of the
Pythagorean and Platonist schools.
</p>

<p>
But Seneca is an inconsistent, though eloquent and powerful,
expounder of that faith in personal immortality, with its
moral consequences, which goes back through many ages to
Plato, to Pythagoras, to the obscure apostles of the Orphic
revelation, perhaps to Egypt.<note place="foot">Herodot. ii. 123.</note> The mythical Orpheus represents,
in the field of religion and in the theory of life and death, an
immense revolution in Greek thought and an enduring spirit
which produced a profound effect down to the last years of
paganism in the West.<note place="foot">Herodotus never mentions Orpheus,
but speaks of
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὰ Ὀρφικά</foreign>, ii. 81; nor do
the schol. on Homer allude to him (Lob.
<hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> i. p. 540; cf. <hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> p. 255
sqq.). His existence was denied by
Aristotle (Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Nat. Deor.</hi> 1. 38, 108).
Plato seems to be as assured of it as
Iamblichus, <hi rend="italic">Cratyl.</hi> 402; cf. Iambl.
<hi rend="italic">Pythag.</hi> 145, 243.</note> With the names of Orpheus and
Pythagoras are connected the assured faith in immortality,
the conception of this life as only preparatory and secondary
to the next, the need for purgation and expiation for deeds
done in the body, the doctrine of transmigration and successive
lives, possibly in animal forms. Orpheus was also the
mythical founder of mysteries in whose secret lore the initiated
were always supposed to receive some comforting assurance
of a life to come.<note place="foot">Iambl. <hi rend="italic">Pythag.</hi> 151; Lobeck, <hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi>
i. p. 238.</note> A spokesman in one of Cicero’s dialogues
recalls with intense gratitude the light of hope and cheerfulness
which the holy rites had shed for him both on life
and death.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Leg.</hi> ii. 14, 36, neque solum
cum laetitia vivendi rationem accepimus,
sed etiam cum spe meliore moriendi.</note> And Plutarch, on the death of their daughter, reminded
his wife of the soothing words which they had together
heard from the hierophant in the Dionysiac mysteries.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Cons. ad Ux.</hi> c. 10.</note> Long
before their day Plato had often, on these high themes, sought
a kind of high ecclesiastical sanction or suggestion for the
tentative conclusions of dialectic.<note place="foot">Plat. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 70 <hi rend="small">C</hi>; 69 <hi rend="small">C</hi>.</note> The great name of Orpheus,
<pb n="517"/><anchor id="Pg517"/>and the mystic lore of this esoteric faith, had indeed in Plato’s
day been sadly cheapened and degraded by a crowd of mercenary
impostors.<note place="foot">Plat. <hi rend="italic">Rep.</hi> ii. 364 <hi rend="small">B</hi>.</note> And even the venerable rites of Eleusis may have
contained an element of coarseness, descending from times
when the processes of nature were regarded unveiled.<note place="foot">Cf. Gardner and Jevons, p. 268,
who think the ceremonies never were
indecent. Rohde, i. p. 289.</note> But
philosophy and reason, which purged and elevated religion as
a whole, did the same service for the mysteries, and Orphic and
Pythagorean became almost convertible.<note place="foot">Herodot. ii. 81; Iambl. <hi rend="italic">Pythag.</hi>
151; Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. p. 103.</note> The systems represent
a converging effort to solve those great questions which lie on
the borderland of religion and philosophy, questions on which the
speculative intellect is so often foiled, and has to fall back on
the support of faith and religious intuition.<note place="foot">Baur, <hi rend="italic">Ch. Hist.</hi> ii. p. 178.</note> In an age which
had forsaken curious speculation, whose whole interest was concentrated
on the moral life, an age which longed for spiritual
vision and supernatural support, an essentially religious philosophy
like the new Pythagoreanism was sure to be a great
power. Gathering up impartially whatever suited its main
end from the ancient schools, maintaining a scrupulous reverence
for all the devotion of the past, it shed over all a higher
light, issuing, as its votaries believed, from the lands of the
dawn.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii.
    <anchor id="corr517"/><corr sic="2">2,</corr> p. 99.</note> Keeping a consecrated place for all the gods of
popular tradition, linking men to the Infinite by a graduated
hierarchy of spirits with their home in the stars, it rose to the
conception of the One, pure, passionless Being to whom no
bloody sacrifice is to be offered, who is to be worshipped best
by silent adoration and a life of purity. And in cultivating
this purity, the grossness of the body must be attenuated by a
strict rule of life.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 7, 8; cf.
Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 108, §§ 17-20.</note> And though the Highest be so remote and
so ethereal, He has not left us without messengers and interpreters
to bridge the vast interval between us and the Infinite,
by means of dream and vision and oracle. A world of strange
daemonic life surrounds us, a world of spirits and heroic souls
akin to ours.<note place="foot">Zeller, iii. 2, p. 122.</note> For though we are immersed in the alien element
of the flesh, yet our complex soul has a divine part, which may
even here below have converse with the Divine. During its
<pb n="518"/><anchor id="Pg518"/>period of duress and probation, it may indeed become irremediably
tainted by contact with matter. It may also, hearkening
to the voice of philosophy, hold itself clear and pure from such
defilement. When the mortal severance of the two natures
comes, the divine part does not perish with its mouldering
prison, but it may have a very different destiny in the ages to
come, according to the manner of its earthly life. This life
and the eternal state are linked in an inevitable moral
sequence; as we sow, so shall we reap in successive lives.
There is a Great Judgment in the unseen world, with momentous,
age-long effects. The spirit which has refused to yield to the
seductions of the flesh may, in the coming life, rise to empyrean
heights beyond human imagination to picture. The soul
which has been imbruted by its environment may have to
pass a long ordeal of three thousand years, and then return
to another sojourn in human form, or it may sink hopelessly
to ever lower depths of degradation.
</p>

<p>
The biography of Apollonius of Tyana is, of course, in
one sense a romance.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 2; cf.
Zeller, iii. 2, p. 134, n.; Baur, <hi rend="italic">Ch. Hist.</hi>
ii. pp. 174, 206.</note> Yet its tales of miracle should hardly
be allowed to obscure its value as a picture of the beliefs of
that age. We cannot doubt that the Pythagorean apostle of
the time of the Flavians went all over the Roman world,
preaching his gospel of moral and ritual purity, kindling or
satisfying the faith in the world of spirit, striving in a strange
fashion to reconcile a mystic monotheism and devotion to
a pure life of the soul with a scrupulous reverence for
all the mythologies. It may, at first sight, appear strange
that a mystic like Apollonius, of the Pythagorean school,
should so seldom allude to the subject of immortality.
The truth is that Apollonius was not a dogmatic preacher;
he dealt little in theories. His chief business, as he
conceived it, was with practical morality, and the reform or
restoration of ritual where it had fallen into desuetude and
decay.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> iv. 20; iii.
41; i. 11, 16; vi. 40.</note> Penetrated as he was with the faith in a spiritual
world, he seems to assume as a postulate the eternity of the
soul, and its incarnation for a brief space on earth. During
its sojourn in the flesh, it is visited by visions from on high,
<pb n="519"/><anchor id="Pg519"/>and such revelations are vouchsafed in proportion to its
ascetic purity.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> ii. 37; vi. 11.</note> What conception of the life to come Apollonius
entertained we cannot say; but its reality to him was a self-evident
truth. We are surrounded by the spirits of the
departed, although we know it not. Sailing among the islands
of the Aegean, he once gratified his disciples by the tale of
his having met the shade of Achilles at his tomb in the Troad.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 16.</note>
Men said that the hero was really dead, and in the old home
of the Myrmidons, his worship was forgotten. But Apollonius,
in a prayer which he had learnt from the sages on the
Ganges, called upon the heroic shade to dispel all doubts by
appearing at his call. At once an earthquake shook the tomb,
and a fair youthful form was by his side of wondrous beauty
and superhuman stature, clothed in a Thessalian mantle. His
stature grew more majestic, and his beauty more glorious as
Apollonius gazed. But the sage had no weak fears in the
presence even of so august a spirit, and pressed him with
questions which savour far more of antiquarian than spiritual
interest. Was Helen really in Troy? Why does not Homer
mention Palamedes? The hero resolved his doubts, sent a
warning message to the Thessalians to restore his forgotten
honours, and in a soft splendour vanished at the first cock-crow.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iv. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
The biography of Apollonius closes with a tale which
throws a strong light on the spiritual cravings of that age.
The sage firmly believed in transmigration and immortality,
although he discouraged debate on these high themes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. 31,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">περὶ ψυχῆς δὲ, ὡς ἀθάνατος εἴη, ἐφιλοσόφει ἔτι διδάσκων
μὴν ὅτι ἀληθὴς ὁ ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς λόγος, πολυπραγμονεῖν
δὲ μὴ ξυγχωρῶν τὰ ὦδε μεγάλα</foreign>.</note> After
his death, the youth of Tyana were much occupied with
solemn thoughts. But there was a sceptic among them who
had vainly besought the departed philosopher to return from
spiritland and dispel his doubts as to the future life. At
last one day he fell asleep among his companions, and then
suddenly started up as one demented, with the cry—<q>I believe
thee.</q> Then he told his friends that he had seen the spirit of
the sage, that he had been actually among them, though they
knew it not, chanting a marvellous song of life and death. It
told of the escape of the soul from the mouldering frame and
<pb n="520"/><anchor id="Pg520"/>of its swift flight to ethereal worlds. <q>Thou shalt know all
when thou art no more; but while thou art yet among the
living, why seek to pierce the mystery?</q><note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> viii. 31,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἢ τὶ μετὰ ζῳοῖσον ἐὼν περὶ τῶνδε ματεύεις;</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
The new Platonist school, with Plutarch and Maximus at
their head, were, in this age, the great apostles of the hope of
immortality. Platonists in their theory of mind and God, Neo-Pythagorean
in their faith in the openness of the human
spirit at its best to supernatural influences, they felt the
doctrine of the coming life to be axiomatic. It is true that
the author of the <hi rend="italic">Consolation to Apollonius</hi>, seems at times to
waver, as Seneca did, between the idea of extinction at death
and the hope of eternal beatitude.<note place="foot">Plut. (?) <hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. 34; cf.
c. 15.</note> This piece is full of
pessimist thoughts of life, and embalms many a sad saying of
the Greek poets on its shortness and its misery.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 7 sqq.</note> Bringing
far more sorrow than joy, life may well be regarded as a
mysterious punishment. That Thracian tribe which mourned
at each birth as others do at death, had a true philosophy of
man’s estate. The great consolation is that, in the phrase of
Heraclitus, death and life are one, we are dying every moment
from our birth. Death is the great healer, in the words of
Aeschylus, the deliverer from the curse of existence, whether it
be an eternal sleep or a far journey into an unknown land.
The prospect of blank nothingness offers no terrors; for the
soul only returns to its original unconsciousness. But this
was hardly a congenial mood to the author, and before the close,
he falls back on the solace of mystic tradition or poetic vision,
that, for the nobler sort, there is a place prepared in the ages
to come, after the Great Judgment, when all souls, naked and
stripped of all trappings and disguises, shall have to answer
for the deeds done in the body.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 36,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τεθνεῶτας γὰρ δεῖ κρίνεσθαι κτλ.</foreign></note> The same faith is professed
by Plutarch to his wife in the Consolation on the death of
their little daughter, which took place while Plutarch was from
home. The loss of a pure bright young soul, full of love and
kindness to all, even to her lifeless toys, was evidently a heavy
blow.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Ux.</hi> c. 3.</note> But Plutarch praises his wife’s simple restraint and
abstinence from the effusive parade of conventional mourning.
All such displays seemed to him a rather vulgar intemperance
<pb n="521"/><anchor id="Pg521"/>and self-indulgence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Ux.</hi> c. 4, 6.</note> And why grieve for one who is spared
all grief? She had her little joys, and, knowing no other, she
suffers no pain of loss. Yet Plutarch would not have his wife
accept the cold consolation that death brings unconsciousness.
He reminds her of the brighter, more cheering vision which
they have enjoyed together as communicants in the Dionysiac
mysteries. If the soul is undying, if it is of divine parentage
and has a divine destiny, then the shortness of its imprisonment
and exile is a blessing. The captive bird may come by
use and wont actually to love its cage. And the worst misery
of old age is not grey hairs and weakness, but a dull absorption
in the carnal and forgetfulness of divine things. <q>Whom the
gods love die young.</q> By calling them back early, they save
them from long wanderings.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. 17-24.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plutarch’s belief in immortality is a religious faith, a
practical postulate. He nowhere discusses the bases of the
belief in an exhaustive way. It is rather inseparable from his
conception of God and His justice, and the relation of the
human soul to God.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> c. 18 (561 <hi rend="small">A</hi>).</note> He admits that the prospect of reward
or punishment in another world has but little influence on
men’s conduct.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi>
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐδέν ἐστι πρὸς ἡμᾶς τοὺς ζῶντας ἀλλ’
    ἀπιστοῦνται καὶ λανθάνοισιν</foreign>.</note> Few believe in the tales of tortures of the
damned. And those who do can soothe their fears, and purchase
a gross immortality, by initiations and indulgences.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Non p. Suav.</hi> c. 26, 27.</note>
Yet it is impossible to doubt that to Plutarch the hope of the
eternal life was a precious possession. He assails with force,
and even asperity, the Epicurean school for their attempt to rob
humanity of it, on the pretext of relieving men of a load of superstitious
fears. They are like men on board a ship who, letting
the passengers know that they have no pilot, console them with
the further information that it does not matter, as they are
bound to drive upon the rocks.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 23 (1103).</note> The great promise of Epicurus
was to free men from the spectral terrors with which poetic
fancy had filled the scenery of the under world. But in doing
so, he invested death with a new horror infinitely worse than
the fabled tortures of the damned. It was a subtle fallacy
which taught that, as annihilation involves the extinction of
consciousness, the lamented loss of the joys and vivid energy
<pb n="522"/><anchor id="Pg522"/>of life was a mere imagination projected on a blank future
where no regret could ever disturb the tranquillity of nothingness<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Non. p. Suav.</hi> c. 30, 26.</note>.
Plutarch took his stand on psychology. The passion
for continued existence is, as a matter of fact, the most imperious
in our nature. With the belief in immortality, Epicurus
sweeps away the strongest and dearest hopes of the mass of
men. This life is indeed full of pain and sorrow; yet men
cling to it passionately, merely as life, in the darkest hours.
And they are ready to brave the worst horrors of Cerberus
and Chimaera for the chance of continued existence.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 27,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">δι’ ἣν ὀλίγου δέω λέγειν πάντας καὶ πάσας εἶναι προθύμους
τῷ Κερβέρῳ διαδάκνεσθαι ὅπως ἐν τῷ εἶναι
διαμένωσι μηδ’ ἀναιρεθῶσι</foreign>.</note> The
privation of a dream of happiness in another world is a real
loss, even though, when the grey day of nothingness dawns,
the consciousness of loss be gone. Is it a light thing to tell
the nobler spirits, the moral athletes, who have battled with
evil all life long, that they have been contending for a visionary
crown?<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 28.</note> Is it nothing to the idealist who, amid all the
obstructions of the life in the flesh, has been fostering his
nobler powers, in the hope of eternal freedom and the full
vision of truth, that that real life to which he fancied
death was only the gateway is, after all, a mere illusion?
Nor does Plutarch disdain to take account of that vivacity of
love which in all ages has sought to soften the bitterness
of parting by the hope of reunion and recognition in other
worlds.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 28,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἡλίκης ἑαυτοὺς χαρᾶς ἀποστεροῦσι ... καὶ τὸν φίλον πατέρα
    καὶ τὴν φίλην μητέρα καί που γυναῖκα χρησθὴν ὄψεσθαι
    μὴ προσδοκῶντες μηδ’ ἔχοντες ἐλπίδα τῆς ὁμιλίας
    ἐκείνης καὶ φιλοφροσύνης ἣν ἔχουσιν οἱ τὰ αὐτὰ
    Πυθαγόρᾳ καὶ Πλάτωνι δοξάζοντες</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Consolation to Apollonius only refers briefly to the
punishment of lawless wealth and power, as the complement
to the reward of virtue.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Consol. ad Apoll.</hi> c. 36.</note> But this aspect of immortality is
dwelt on at length in the remarkable treatise on the Delays of
the Divine Vengeance. The problem of hereditary guilt, and
the punishment of the children for the sins of the fathers in
this world, in view of the justice and benevolence of God, leads
on to the thought of another tribunal which may terribly correct
the injustices of time.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> c. 16: cf.
Gréard, <hi rend="italic">De la Morale de Plut.</hi> p. 283;
Oakesmith, <hi rend="italic">Rel. of Plut.</hi> p. 111 sqq.</note> The doctrine of Divine providence and
<pb n="523"/><anchor id="Pg523"/>the doctrine of immortality stand or fall together.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Ser. N. Vind.</hi> v. c. 17,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἷς οὖν, ἔφην, λόγος ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν πρόνοιαν καὶ τὴν διαμονὴν
τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ψυχῆς βεβαιῶν, κτλ.</foreign></note> God could
not take so much care for ephemeral souls, blooming for a brief
space and then withering away, as in the women’s soon-fading
gardens of Adonis.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 17 (560 <hi rend="small">F</hi>).</note> Above all, Apollo would be the greatest
deceiver, the god who has so often solemnly from the tripod
ordered rites of expiation and posthumous honours to be paid to
lofty souls departed.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 17, ad fin.</note> Yet, like his great master Plato, Plutarch
felt that the full assurance of the long dream of humanity lies
beyond the veil—that we know not what we shall be. And,
like the master, he invoked the apocalyptic power of the
religious and poetic imagination to fortify the hesitating
conclusions of the reason.
</p>

<p>
The visionary power and charm of the great master, whose
reign was to be prolonged for ages after Plutarch’s time, is seen,
perhaps in a faint reflection, in Plutarch’s mythical forecast of
the future of the soul. Plato’s psychology, his sharp opposition
of the reason to the lower nature rooted in the flesh, his
vision of the Eternal Goodness, his intensely moral conception
of the responsibility of life on earth, its boundless possibilities
of future unimpeded intuition, its possible eternal degradation
through ages of cyclic change, all this, together with kindred
elements, perhaps from the Semitic east, had left a profound
effect on religious minds. The greatness of S. Augustine is
nowhere more apparent than in his frank recognition of the
spiritual grandeur of Plato. And that great spirit, so agile in
dialectic subtlety, so sublime in its power of rising above the
cramping limitations of our mortal life, is also, from its vivid
poetic sympathy, most ready to aid weak ordinary souls to
climb <q>the altar stairs.</q> Never was pure detached intelligence
wedded so harmoniously to glowing imagination, never was
ethereal truth so clothed in the warm colouring and splendour
of the world of sense. Where reason has strained its utmost
strength to solve the eternal riddle, ecstatic vision and religious
myth, transcending the limits of space and time, must be called
in to lend their aid.
</p>

<p>
Plato and the Platonic Socrates are fully conscious that
the conclusions of philosophic reason on a future state can be
<pb n="524"/><anchor id="Pg524"/>only tentative. And they often fall back on a divine doctrine,
or tradition, or a <anchor id="corr524"/><corr sic="mythopœic">mythopoeic</corr> power by which poetic imagination
peoples the dim regions of a world beyond the senses.
The visions of Timarchus and Thespesius in Plutarch are, like
the Nekuia of the <hi rend="italic">Phaedo</hi> and of the <hi rend="italic">Republic</hi>, an effort of the
religious imagination to penetrate the darkness from which
reason recoils. Nor is the effort strange in one who, along with
the purest conception of an immaterial spirit, still believed in
the efficacy of legend and material symbol to reveal the truth
which they veiled.<note place="foot">Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. pp. 275, 279;
Jowett’s <hi rend="italic">Plato</hi>, i. p. 396; Pl. <hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi>
85 <hi rend="small">C</hi>, <hi rend="small">D</hi>; 60 <hi rend="small">B</hi>, <hi rend="small">C</hi>; 69 C; <hi rend="italic">Meno</hi> 81 <hi rend="small">A</hi>;
<hi rend="italic">Phaed.</hi> 114 <hi rend="small">D</hi>,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ μὲν οὖν τοιαῦτα διισχυρίσασθαι οὕτως ἔχειν, οὐ πρέπει
νοῦν ἔχοντι ἀνδρί, κτλ.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
Thespesius of Soli, a man of evil life, once fell from a height,
was taken up for dead, but revived again on the third day, on
the eve of his funeral. He came back to the living an altered
man, after a marvellous experience. His soul, on escaping from
the body, was swept along a sea of light among the stars.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> c. 22
(563 <hi rend="small">C</hi>).</note> He
saw other souls emerging in the form of fiery bubbles, which
burst and gave forth a subtle form in the likeness of man.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi>
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εἶτα ῥηγνυμένης ἀτρέμα τῆς πομφόλυγος, ἐκβαίνειν τύπον
ἐχούσας ἀνθρωποειδῆ, τὸν δ’ ὄγκον εὐσταλεῖς κτλ.</foreign></note> Three
or four he recognised, and would have spoken to them, but they
seemed delirious or senseless, and shrank away from him, forming
in the end little companies of their own, who swept along in
wild disordered movements, uttering strange cries of wailing or
terror. The soul of an old acquaintance then hailed him and
became his guide, pointing out that the souls of the really dead
cast no shadow, being perfectly pellucid, surrounded by light.
Yet some of them are marked with scales and weals and
blotches. Adrasteia is the inevitable judge of all, and, through
three ministers, three great classes of criminals receive their
proper doom. Some are punished swiftly on earth, another
class meet with heavier judgment in the shades. The utterly
incurable are ruthlessly pursued by the Erinnys, and finally
plunged in a dark abyss, of which the horrors might not be
told. The second class undergo a fierce purgatorial cleansing, in
which some spirits have all their stains wiped out and become
clear and lustrous. But where evil is more obstinate, and
passion again and again asserts its power, the soul long retains
a colour appropriate to its peculiar vice. The mean avaricious
<pb n="525"/><anchor id="Pg525"/>soul is dark and squalid; the cruel is blood-red; the envious
violet and livid. Short of the worst eternal torture, souls
with insatiable craving for fleshly delights, gravitate to a birth
into low animal forms.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> c. 22
(565).</note>
</p>

<p>
Thespesius and his guide are then swept on wings of
light to other and less gloomy scenes. Over the chasm of
Forgetfulness, clothed in its recesses with flowers and herbs
which exhale a fragrant odour, the opening through which
Dionysus had passed to his place among the gods, floated a
cloud of spirits like birds, drinking in the fragrance with
mirth and gladness. On again they passed, till they came to
a crater which received the flow of many-coloured streams,
snow-white or rainbow-hued,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 22 (566),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἔδοξεν ἀφορᾶν κρατῆρα μέγαν, εἰς δὲ τούτον ἐμβάλλοντα
ῥεύματα τὸ μὲν ἀφροῦ θαλάσσης ἢ χιόνων λαμπρότερον κτλ.</foreign></note> and hard by was the oracle of
Night and Selene, from which issue dreams and phantoms to
wander among men. Then Thespesius was dazzled with the
radiance which shot from the Delphic tripod upwards to the
peaks of Parnassus; and, blinded by the radiance, he could
only hear the shrill voice of a woman chanting a song which
seemed to tell of the hour of his own death. The woman, his
guide explained, was the Sibyl who dwells on the face of the
moon. The sweep of the moon’s onward course prevented
him catching the Sibyl’s words to the full, but he heard a
prophecy of the desolation of Campania by the fires of Vesuvius,
and the death of the emperor.
</p>

<p>
Other scenes of punishment follow, among which Thespesius
saw his own father rising from the abyss, covered with weals
and marks of torture which had been inflicted for a long-buried
crime. Finally, the friendly guide vanished, and
Thespesius was forced onwards by dread spectral forms to
witness fresh scenes of torment. The hypocrite who had
hidden his vices under a veil of decorum was forced, with
infinite pain of contortion, to turn out his inmost soul. The
avaricious were plunged by daemons by turns in three lakes,
one of boiling gold, one of freezing lead, and one of hardest
iron. But the worst fate of all was reserved for those whose
sins had been visited on their innocent descendants upon
earth, who pursued them with curses, or clung around them
<pb n="526"/><anchor id="Pg526"/>in clouds like bees or bats, keeping ever poignant the memory
of transmitted guilt and suffering.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Ser. Num. Vind.</hi> c. 22
(567 <hi rend="small">D</hi>),
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">πάντων δὲ πάσχειν ἔλεγεν οἰκτρότατα τὰς ἤδη δοκούσας ἀφεῖσθαι
    τῆς Δίκης, εἶτ’ αὖθις συλλαμβανομένας· αὖται δ’ ἦσαν
    ὧν εἴς τινας ἐκγόνους ἢ παῖδας ἡ ποινὴ περιῆλθεν κτλ.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
The vision of Timarchus, in the piece on the Genius of
Socrates, has a rather different motive from that which inspired
the vision of Thespesius. Thespesius came back with a
message as to the endless consequences of sin in worlds
beyond the senses, and the far-reaching responsibilities of
the life on earth. The experiences of Timarchus in the
cave of Trophonius were intended to teach the doctrine of
the existence, apart from the lower powers akin to fleshly
nature, of the pure intelligence or daemon, which, coming
from the Divine world, can catch its voices and transmit
them to the mortal life here below. Timarchus made the
descent into the cave of Trophonius and spent in its weird
darkness two nights and a day, during which he saw a wondrous
revelation of the spirit-world.<note place="foot">Cf. Pausan. ix. 39, § 5; Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> viii. 19; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Gen.
Socr.</hi> c. 21, 22 (589, 590); cf. Gardner
and Jevons, <hi rend="italic">Greek Antiq.</hi> pp. 267-8.</note> His higher part, escaping
from the sutures of the head, emerged in pellucid ether.
There was no trace of earthly scenery, but countless islands swept
around him, gleaming with the shifting colours of lambent fire,
amid tones coming from ethereal distances.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Gen. Socr.</hi> c. 22 (590),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἀναβλέψας δὲ τὴν μὲν γῆν οὐδαμοῦ καθορᾶν, νήσους δὲ
λαμπομένας μαλακῷ πυρί κτλ.</foreign></note> From a yawning
abyss of surging darkness arose endless wailings and moans.
An unseen guide explained to him the fourfold division of the
universe and the boundaries of its provinces. High above all
is the sphere of the One and the Invisible. Next in order is
the region of pure mind, of which the Sun is lord. The third
is the debatable land between pure intelligence and the sensible
and mortal—the region of soul, whose mistress is the moon.
Styx is the boundary between this lunar kingdom and the low
world of matter, sin, and death. The three realms beneath
the highest correspond to the three elements of our composite
nature,—mind, soul, and body.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> (591).</note> This mortal life is a temporary
and unequal partnership of the Divine reason with the lower
appetites, which have their roots in the flesh. It is an exile,
an imprisonment; it is also a probation of the higher part of
human nature, and its escape comes to it by a twofold death.
<pb n="527"/><anchor id="Pg527"/>The first, imperfect and incomplete, is the severance of soul
from body in what men call death, the falling away of the
gross wrappings of matter. This death is under the sway of
Demeter. The second, under the care of Persephone, is a
slower process, in which the ethereal reason, the true eternal
personality of man, is finally released from association with
the passionate and sensitive nature, which is akin to the bodily
organism. After the first corporeal death, all souls wander
for a time in the space between the moon and earth. In
the vision of Timarchus, he saw over the chasm of darkness
a host of stars with a curious variety of motion. Some
shot up from the gulf with a straight decided impetus.
Others wavered in deflexions to right or left, or, after an
upward movement, plunged again into the abyss. These
motions, as the invisible guide expounded, represent the
various tendencies of souls, corresponding to the strength or
weakness of the spiritual force within them. All souls have
an element of the Divine reason, but it is variously blended
with the baser elements in different natures. In some it
becomes completely sunk and absorbed in the life of the
senses. In others, the rational part holds itself above the
lower bodily life, and maintains an almost separate existence.
And yet there are natures in which the rational
and irrational elements wage a long and indecisive conflict
until, slowly, at last, the passions recognise their rightful
master, and become obedient to the heavenly voice within.
The debased and hopeless souls, rising for a moment after
death, are repelled with fierce angry flashes by the moon,
and fall back again to the world of sense and corruption, to
undergo a second birth. The purer souls are received by her
for a loftier destiny. In some, the pure spiritual part is finally
released by the love of the Sun from the lower powers of the
soul, which wither and fade away as the body does on earth.
Others, still retaining the composite nature, though no longer
tainted by the flesh, dwell in the moon as daemons, but often
revisit the earth on various missions, to furnish inspiration to
oracles and mysteries, to save men from crime or to punish,
to help the struggling by land or sea. But even the daemons
may fall from their high estate. If, in their duties of providence
and succour, they show anger or favour or envy, they
<pb n="528"/><anchor id="Pg528"/>may be thrust down once more into the purgatory of material
form.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Fac. in Orb. Lun.</hi> c. 30.</note>
</p>

<p>
It may well be that the unsympathetic critic will regard
such an imaginative invasion of the unseen as a freak of
lawless fancy, hardly worth chronicling. And like all similar
attempts, the apocalypse of Plutarch may easily be treated
with an airy ridicule. To a more serious criticism, it seems
vitiated by a radical inconsistency. Starting with the principle
of the absolutely immaterial nature of the immortal part of
man, it yet depicts its future existence in the warmest colours
of the world of sense. Its struggles, its tortures, its beatitude
are described in terms which might seem fitting only to a
corporeal nature. All this is true; and yet the answer which
Plutarch would probably have made to any such cavils is very
simple. How can you speak of pure disembodied spirit at all,
how can you imagine it, save in the symbolism of ordinary
speech? Refine and subtilise your language to the very
uttermost, and it will still retain associations and reminiscences,
however faint and distant, of the material world. Myth and
symbol are necessary to any expression of human thought
alike about God and the future of the soul. The Infinite
Spirit and the future destiny of the finite, which is His child,
are equally beyond the range of human sense and speech.
When the human spirit has exhausted all its efforts of
imagination to pierce the darkness of the world beyond the
grave, it takes refuge in some religious system which claims
to have a divine message and speaks in the tones of another
world. The voice from eternity came to troubled heathendom
from Egypt and the East.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="3" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="529"/><anchor id="Pg529"/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. The old Roman religion"/><index index="pdf" level1="III. The old Roman religion"/>
<head>CHAPTER III</head>

<head type="sub">THE OLD ROMAN RELIGION</head>

<p>
It is well known that, from the second Punic War to the
revival of Augustus, old Roman religion was falling into
decay. Yet sweeping assertions about the religious condition
of any age must he taken with some reserve. They are
often unsafe about a contemporary society; they must be still
more so with regard to a society which is known to us almost
entirely through the literary remains of a comparatively small
cultivated class. Even among that limited circle, we can
know only the opinions of a few, and hardly anything of its
silent members, still less of the feelings of its women and
dependents. A deep shadow rests on those remote granges
and quiet country towns in Samnium or Lombardy where
character remained untainted in the days of Nero or Domitian,
and where the religion of Numa long defied the penal edicts of
Theodosius and Honorius. Lucretius, whose mission it was to
liberate men from the terrors of old Latin and Etrurian superstition,
was not contending against an imaginary foe. The
sombre enthusiasm which he throws into the conflict reveals
the strength of the enemy. The grandmother of Atticus and
Terentia, the wife of Cicero, were timorous devotees. Among
the aristocratic augurs of Cicero’s day there were firm believers
in the sacred birds; and Lentulus, a confederate of Catiline,
trusted implicitly in the oracles of the Sibyl.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p. 67.</note>
</p>

<p>
Still there can be no doubt that in the governing and thinking
class of the last century of the Republic, scepticism and
even open contempt for the old religion were rampant. Many
causes were at work to produce this decadence of old Roman
<pb n="530"/><anchor id="Pg530"/>faith. It was hardly possible for the cultivated Roman of the
days of Scipio Aemilianus, or of Cicero and Caesar, who had
fought and travelled in many lands, and studied their
mythologies and philosophies, to acquiesce in the faith of the
simple farmers of Latium, who founded the Ambarvalia and
Lupercalia, who offered the entrails of a dog to Robigus<note place="foot">W. Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 89.</note> and
milk to Pales and Silvanus, who worshipped Jupiter Feretrius
under the mountain oak.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 229.</note> Since those far-off days, Latium
had come under many influences, and added many new deities
to her pantheon. The gods of Hellas had come to be identified
with the gods of Rome, or to share their honours. Syncretism
had been at work in Italy centuries before the days of Plutarch
and Aristides. And the old Italian deities, who had only a
shadowy personality, with no poetry of legend to invest them
with human interest, melted into one another or into forms of alien
mythology. Greek literature became familiar to the educated
from the Hannibalic war, and a writer like Euripides, who had
a great popularity, must have influenced many by the audacious
skill with which he lowered the dignity and dimmed the
radiance of the great figures of Greek legend. The comic
stage improved upon the lesson. Early in the second century
Ennius translated the Sacred Histories of Euhemerus, and
familiarised his countrymen with a theory which reduced
Jupiter and Saturn, Faunus and Hercules, to the stature of
earthly kings and warriors. But Greek philosophy was the
great solvent of faith. The systems of the New Academy and
Epicurus were openly or insidiously hostile to religious belief.
But they had not so long and powerful a reign over the Roman
mind as Stoicism, and, although the earlier Stoicism extended
a philosophic patronage to popular religion, it may be doubted
whether it stimulated faith. There was indeed a certain
affinity between Stoical doctrine and old Roman religion, as
there was between Stoic morals and old Roman character. In
resolving the gods by allegory and pseudo-scientific theory into
various potencies of the great World-Soul, the follower of Zeno
did not seem to do much violence to the vaguely personified
abstractions of the old Latin creed. Above all, with the exception
of Panaetius, the Stoic doctors did not throw doubt
on the powers of divination and augury, so essential an element
<pb n="531"/><anchor id="Pg531"/>in the religion of Rome. The power to read the future was a
natural corollary to the providence and benevolence of the
gods.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> i. 5, 9, existimo ...
si Dii sint, esse qui divinent; i, 38,
82; si sunt Dii, neque ante declarant
hominibus quae futura sint, aut non
diligunt homines, aut quid eventurum
sit ignorant. This argument is attributed
to Chrysippus and Diogenes in ii.
49, 101.</note> Yet, although the Stoic might strive to discover the
germ of truth, he did not conceal his contempt for the husk of
mythology in which it was hidden, and for many of the practices
of worship.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> 39 (Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. D.</hi>
vi. 11). See Varro’s opinion, <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> vi. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Quintus Scaevola and Varro applied all the forces of subtle
antiquarianism and reverence to sustain the ancestral faith.
But they also drew the line sharply between the religion of
philosophy and the religion of the State. And Varro went so
far as to say that the popular religion was the creation of early
statesmen,<note place="foot"><anchor id="Note531-3"/><hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, vi. 4.</note> and that if the work had to be done again, it might
be done better in the light of philosophy. The Stoic in
Cicero, as Seneca did after him, treated the tales of the gods
as mere anile superstition.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Nat. D.</hi> ii. 28, 70; cf. Sen.
<hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> 39, cf. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, 47.</note> It is probable that such was the
tone, in their retired debates, of the remarkable circle which
surrounded Scipio and Laelius. Panaetius, their philosophic
guide, had less sympathy than any great Stoic with popular
theology.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> i. 3, 6.</note> Polybius gave small place to Providence in human
affairs, and regarded Roman religion as the device of statesmen
to control the masses by mystery and terror.<note place="foot">Polyb. vi. 56,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ μοι δοκεῖ τὸ παρὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις ὀνειδιζόμενον
τοῦτο συνέχειν τὰ Ῥωμαίων πράγματα, λέγω δὲ τὴν δεισιδαιμονίαν,
ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον γὰρ ἐκτετραγῴδεται ... ὥστε μὴ καταλιπεῖν ὑπερβολἠν, κτλ.</foreign></note> Yet these men
were enthusiastic champions of a system which they regarded
as irrational, but which was consecrated by immemorial
antiquity. Laelius defended the institutions of Numa in a
speech of golden eloquence which moved the admiration of
Cicero, just as Symmachus defended them five centuries later
before the council of Valentinian.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Nat. Deor.</hi> iii 17, 43, in
illa aureola oratiuncula, cf. Sym. <hi rend="italic">Rel.</hi> iii.</note> The divorce between
esoteric belief and official profession must have insidiously
lowered the moral tone of those who were at once thinkers
and statesmen. Such a false position struck some of the
speakers in Cicero’s theological dialogues, and it makes his own
opinions an enigma.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p. 60.</note> The external and utilitarian attitude to
<pb n="532"/><anchor id="Pg532"/>the State religion hardly secured even punctual or reverent
conformity in the last age of the Republic. Divination and
augury had become mere engines of political intrigue, and the
aristocratic magistrate could hardly take the omens without a
smile. Varro could not repress the fear that the old religion,
on which he expended such a wealth of learning, might perish
from mere negligence.<note place="foot">Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. D.</hi> vi. 2; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">De
Leg.</hi> ii. 13, 33, dubium non est quin
haec disciplina et ars augurum evanuerit
jam et vetustate et negligentia.</note> The knowledge of liturgical usage
began to fade, and Varro had to recall the very names of
forgotten gods. An ancient priesthood of the highest rank
remained unfilled for seventy years.<note place="foot">D. Cass. liv. 36; cf. W. Fowler’s
<hi rend="italic">Rom. Fest.</hi> p. 343, Preller, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Mythol.</hi>
p. 24.</note> Scores of the most
venerable temples were allowed to fall into ruin,<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> c. 30.</note> and ancient
brotherhoods like the Titii and Fratres Arvales are hardly
heard of for generations before the reforms of the Augustan age.
</p>

<p>
It is not within the scope of this work to enter minutely
into the subject of that great effort of reform or reaction.
It is commonly said that the cool imperial statesman had
chiefly political ends in view, and especially the aggrandisement
and security of the principate. And certainly Ovid, who
strove to interest his countrymen in the revival of their religion,
does not display much seriousness in religion or morals. He
treats as lightly the amours of Olympus as the intrigues of
the Campus Martius and the Circus. Yet it may well have
been that after the terrible orgies of civil strife through which
the Roman world had passed, Augustus was the convinced
representative of a repentant wish to return to the old paths.
The Roman character, through all wild aberrations of a trying
destiny, was an enduring type. And Augustus, if he may have
indulged in impious revels in his youth, which recall the
wanton freaks of Alcibiades,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 70, coena
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">δωδεκάθεος</foreign>: cf.
Thuc. vi. c. 28, § 1.</note> had two great characteristics of
the old Roman mind, formalism and superstition. He had
an infinite faith in dreams and omens. He would begin no
serious business on the Nones.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> c. 91, 92.</note> When he had to pronounce
a funeral oration over his sister, Octavia, he had a curtain
drawn before the corpse, lest the eyes of the pontiff might be
polluted by the sight of death.<note place="foot">D. Cass. liv. 35 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note> We may think that his
<pb n="533"/><anchor id="Pg533"/>religious revival was not inspired by real religious sentiment.
Yet it is well to remind ourselves that old Roman religion,
while it consecrated and solemnised the scenes and acts of
human life, was essentially a formal religion; the <hi rend="italic">opus
operatum</hi> was the important thing. Its business was to avert
the anger or win the favour of dim unearthly powers; it was
not primarily to purify or elevate the soul. Above all, it was
interwoven from the beginning with the whole fabric of society
and the State. Four centuries after Augustus was in his
grave, it was only by a violent wrench, which inflicted infinite
torture even on pagan mystics of the Neoplatonist school, that
Rome was severed from the gods who had been the guardians
and partners of her career for twelve hundred years. The
altar of Victory which Augustus had placed in the Senate-house,
and before which twelve generations of senators after
him offered their prayers for the chief of the State, the most
sacred symbol of the pagan Empire, was only removed after a
fierce, obstinate struggle.
</p>

<p>
The religious revival of Augustus may not have aroused
any deep religious sentiment; that, as we shall see, was to
come from a different source. But it gave a fresh life to the
formal religion of the State, which maintained itself till within
a few years before the invasion of Alaric. The title Augustus
which the new emperor assumed was one which, to the
Roman mind, associated him with the majesty of Jupiter and
the sanctity of all holy places and solemn rites.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>, i. 609, hic socium
summo cum Jove nomen habet. Sancta
vocant augusta patres; augusta vocantur
Templa, sacerdotum rite dicata
manu.</note> It was
the beginning of that theocratic theory of monarchy which
was to culminate, under the influence of Sun-worship, in the
third century, and to propagate itself into ages far removed
from the worship of Jupiter or the Sun. Although
the counsels of Maecenas, recorded by Dion Cassius, may be
apocryphal, Augustus acted in their spirit.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lii. 36,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ μὲν θεῖον πάντῃ πάντως αὐτός τε σέβου καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους
τιμᾷν ἀνάγκαζε</foreign>.</note> As triumvir he
had raised a shrine to Isis,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xlvii. 15 <hi rend="italic">ad fin.</hi></note> as emperor he frowned on alien
worships.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> liv. 6.</note> His mission was to restore the ancient religion of
Latium. He burnt two thousand books of spurious augury,
retaining only the Sibylline oracles.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> c. 31.</note> He restored the ancient
<pb n="534"/><anchor id="Pg534"/>temples, some of them, like those of Jupiter Feretrius and
Juno Sospita, coeval with the Roman State, and encouraged
his friends to do the same for other venerable monuments of
devotion. The most lavish gifts of gold and jewels were
dedicated in the Capitoline temples. The precision of ancient
augury was restored. Ancient priesthoods which had been
long vacant were filled up, and the sacred colleges were raised
in dignity and wealth.<note place="foot">D. Cass. li. 20.</note> Special care was taken to recall the
vestals to the chaste dignity from which they had fallen for a
hundred years. Before taking his seat, each senator was
required to make a prayer, with an offering of incense and
wine before the altar. Three worships, specially connected
with the fortunes of Augustus or his race,—those of Venus
Genetrix, Mars Ultor, and the Palatine Apollo,—were revived
with added splendour.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 87.</note> The emperor paid special attention
to the ancient sacred colleges, such as the Salii and Arvales,
which went back to days far earlier than the Republic. Amid
all the cares of State, he attended their meetings punctually.
The dangerous right of co-optation was quietly withdrawn, till
the members in the end owed their appointment to the sacerdotal
chief of the State.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Röm. Staatsr.</hi> ii. p.
1024.</note> The colleges became the most courtly
and deferential supports of the prince’s power. Prayers for
his safety soon found a place in their antique litanies. It has
been said with some truth that the Salii and Arvales seem to
be thinking more of the emperors than of the gods. The
colleges had a courtly memory for all anniversaries in the
imperial family. The Arval brothers achieved the infamy of
complimenting Nero on his return after the murder of Agrippina,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2042; cf. 2444 and 2034.
Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p 363.</note>
and made vows of equal fervour for all the emperors
of the year 69.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2051, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
But it was through the chief pontificate that the emperors
did most at once to fortify and dignify their secular power,
and to prolong the reign of the old Latin religion. It was
the highest religious dignity of ancient Rome. The college of
which the emperor, as Pontifex Maximus, was head exercised
a supreme and comprehensive control over the whole field
of religion.<note place="foot">Momms. <hi rend="italic">Röm. Staatsr.</hi> ii. p. 1022.</note> It was charged with the duty of maintaining
<pb n="535"/><anchor id="Pg535"/>the ancestral purity and exactness of the national worship,
and of repressing tendencies to innovation and the adoption
of alien rites. It selected the virgins who guarded the
eternal fire, and sat in judgment on erring vestals and their
betrayers. It had special jurisdiction in questions of adoption,
burial, and sacred sites.<note place="foot">Liv. i. 20.</note> From Augustus every emperor
was also chief pontiff;<note place="foot">Habel, <hi rend="italic">De Pontif. Rom.</hi> p. 45.</note> even the Christian princes from
Constantine to Valentinian and Valens bear the honoured
title in the inscriptions, and accepted the pontifical robes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1080, 1117; cf. Zosim. iv. 36;
Amm. Marc. xvi. 10; Sym. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> x. 54.</note> Thus
the emperors strove in their religious attributes to connect
themselves with the sacred tradition of Numa and the Roman
kings. And, as time went on, the imperial house claimed a
growing share in the pontifical honours. Nero, indeed, had
been a member of all the sacred colleges as well as chief
pontiff.<note place="foot">Habel, <hi rend="italic">De Pontif. Rom.</hi> p. 13.</note> But down to the reign of Vespasian only one of the
<q>Caesares</q> could belong to the sacred college. But his sons
Titus and Domitian were co-opted to the pontificate and all
the priestly colleges before his death.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> pp. 16, 17, 62; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 932,
1984.</note> From Hadrian the
pontificate and all the highest sacerdotal honours were held by
all designated successors of the emperor.<note place="foot">Habel, p. 62.</note> Antoninus Pius has
the insignia of four priestly colleges on his coins.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 24.</note> M. Aurelius
was one of the Salian brotherhood in his eighth year,<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant. Phil.</hi> c. 4.</note> and was
received into all the colleges at nineteen.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 6.</note> Commodus had
reached the same sacred honours before he assumed the toga,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 16; Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Com.</hi> c. 12
(a. 175).</note> and
in five years more was Pontifex Maximus. Thus deeply had
the policy of Augustus sunk into the minds of his successors.
It is little wonder that never in the great days of the Republic
were the forms of ancient religion more scrupulously observed
than in the reign of M. Aurelius.<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Ant.</hi> c. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
Private opinion after the Augustan revival greatly varied
as to matters of faith. Men like the elder Pliny and Seneca
scoffed at anthropomorphic religion. Men like Juvenal
and Tacitus maintained a wavering attitude, with probably a
receding faith. Others like Suetonius were rapacious collectors of
every scrap of the miraculous. The emperors who succeeded
<pb n="536"/><anchor id="Pg536"/>Augustus were, with the exception of Nero, loyal supporters
and protectors of the religion of the State. Tiberius, although
personally careless of religion, displayed a scrupulous respect
for ancient usage in filling up the ancient priesthoods, and in
guarding the Sibylline verses from interpolations.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 16. Yet he is said
to be <hi rend="italic">circa deos negligentior</hi>, c. 69.</note> He also
frowned on the imported rites of Egypt.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 36.</note> Claudius, at once
pedantic and superstitious, revived venerable rites of the days
of Tullus Hostilius, and, when an ill-omened bird alighted on
the temple of Jupiter, as supreme pontiff, the emperor pronounced
the solemn form of expiation before the assembled
people.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> c. 22; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi>
xii. 8.</note> Nero, and the Neronian competitors for the Empire,
in the fierce conflict which followed his death, were, indeed,
often, though not always, careless of ancient rite, but they were
all the slaves of superstition.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, c. 7, 8, 12; <hi rend="italic">Vitell.</hi> c.
5, 11; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 87.</note> The Flavians and Antonines
were religious conservatives of the spirit of Augustus. There
is a monument to Vespasian of the year 78 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> as <q>the
restorer of temples and public ceremonies.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2364.</note> The restoration
of the Capitol, which had been burned down in the civil war,
was one of the first tasks of his reign. And the ceremony
made such an impression on the imagination of the youthful
Tacitus, that he has recorded with studied care the stately
and accurate ritual of olden time which was observed by the
emperor.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 53.</note> Domitian carried on the restoration on even a
more splendid scale; he was a devotee of Minerva, and a
rigorous vindicator of old ascetic religious law.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> c. 5, 15.</note> The emperor
Hadrian, whose character is an enigma of contrasts, to judge by
his last famous <hi rend="italic">jeu d’esprit</hi> on his death-bed, probably died a
sceptic. Yet his biographer tells us that he was a careful
guardian of the ancient ritual.<note place="foot">Ael. Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 22.</note> The archaistic fashion in
literary taste, which had begun in the first century, and which
culminated in Hadrian’s reign, favoured and harmonised with
a scrupulous observance of ancient forms in religion.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 16, § 5; Plin. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> vi. 21,
§ 1; Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, p. 96; Martha,
<hi rend="italic">Moralistes</hi>, p. 184 sq.</note> The
genius of one too early taken away has done more than a
legion of historic critics to picture for us the sad, dutiful piety
of a spirit of the Antonine age, steeped in philosophies which
<pb n="537"/><anchor id="Pg537"/>made the passing moment of vivid artistic perception the
great end of life, yet still instinct with the old Roman love
of immemorial forms at the harvest gathering or the yearly
offering to the dead members of the household.<note place="foot">Pater, <hi rend="italic">Marius</hi>, chap. ii., xxvii.</note> The cheerless
negation of Epicurus, and the equally withering theology
of the Stoics, could not weaken in Roman hearts the spell of
ancestral pieties which clustered round the vault near the grey
old country house of the race, looking down on the Tyrrhene
sea, or the awe of ancient grove or spring sacred to Silvanus
and the Nymphs, or the calm, chastened joy in a ritual in which
every act was dictated by a love of ceremonial cleanness and
exactness, and redolent of an immemorial past. In such a
household, and in such an atmosphere, the two great Antonines
were reared. The first, who was before all else an honest
country gentleman, fond of hunting, fishing, and the gladness
of the vintage at Lorium, never failed to perform all due
sacrifices unless he was ill. His coins bear the pictured
legends of the infancy of Rome.<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi> c. 11.</note> M. Aurelius was famous
as a boy for his knowledge of Roman ritual. Enrolled in the
college of the Salii in his eighth year, he performed all its
sacred offices with perfect composure, reciting from memory,
with no one to dictate the form, every word of the ancient
liturgy which had in his generation become almost unintelligible.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 4.</note>
In the terror of the Marcomannic invasion he
delayed his departure for the seat of war to summon around
him all the priests; he had the city purified in solemn,
decorous fashion, not excluding even the rites of alien lands;
and for seven days the images of the gods were feasted on
their couches along all the streets.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The emperors from Augustus found religion a potent ally of
sovereignty, and the example of the master of the world was a
great force. Yet it may well be doubted whether, in the matter
of religious conservatism, the emperors were not rather following
than leading public opinion. Gods were in those times being
created by the score; apotheosis was in the air from the days of
Nero to the days of the Severi. Petronius, with an exaggeration
which has a certain foundation in fact, affirms that in Croton
you could more readily light upon a god than on a man.<note place="foot">Petron. c. 17.</note> The
<pb n="538"/><anchor id="Pg538"/>elder Pliny uses almost the same strength of language. The
grumbler in Lucian indignantly complains of the fashion in
which the ancient gods of Olympus are being overshadowed by
the divine <hi rend="italic">parvenus</hi> of every clime. And, as we shall presently
see, the inscriptions reveal an immense propaganda of worships
in tone and spirit apparently hostile to the old religion of the
Latin race. Yet the inscriptions also show that the old gods
had really little to fear from the new. A survey of the index
to almost any volume of the Corpus will convince the student
that the Trinity of the Capitol,—Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva,—that
Hercules and Silvanus, the Nymphs, Semo Sancus and
Dea Dia, Mars and Fortuna, so far from being neglected, were
apparently more popular than ever.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. p. 1160 sqq.; xii. p.
924 sqq.; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> iii.; <hi rend="italic">Ind.</hi> pp. 25,
29, 30, 33.</note> In an age of growing
monotheism the King of the gods was, of course, still supreme
in his old ascendency. Jupiter is worshipped under many
titles; he is often coupled or identified with some provincial
deity of ancient fame.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3070, 3077; 2383; iii.
2804, 5787; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1244, 1245.</note> But Jupiter is everywhere. The
Lord of the thunder and the tempest has shrines on the
high passes of the Apennines or the Alps,<note place="foot">Liv. xxi. 38, quem in summo sacratum
vertice Poeninum montani appellant;
<hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 231-6, 5028, 1271.</note> and soldiers or
travellers leave the memorials of their gratitude for his
protection on perilous journeys.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1267, 1271.</note> The women of Campanian
towns go in procession to implore him to send rain.<note place="foot">Petron. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> 44.</note> Antoninus
Pius built a temple to Juno Sospita of Lanuvium, where the
goddess had a sacred grove, and a worship of great antiquity.<note place="foot">Jul. Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Ant. P.</hi> c. 8;
Preller, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Myth.</hi> p. 185.</note>
The Quinquatria of Minerva were not only celebrated with
special honour by Domitian, but by large and powerful classes
who owned her divine patronage, physicians and artists, orators
and poets.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Dom.</hi> c. 4.</note> Some of the old Latin deities seem to have even
grown in popularity under the early Empire. Hercules, the
god of plenty, strong truth, and good faith, whose legend is
intertwined with the most venerable names in Roman story,
has his altars and monuments everywhere.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1561, 1590; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii.
4316; iii. 1162.</note> Combining with
his own native Latin character the poetic prestige of his
brother of Greek legend, he became the symbol of world-<pb n="539"/><anchor id="Pg539"/>wide conquest, and was associated in the end with the triumph
of the <q>unconquered</q> Mithra. His image is stamped upon the
coins of some of the emperors. Septimius Severus, Caracalla,
and Diocletian took him for their great divine patron and
ensample.<note place="foot">Preller, p. 437.</note> Silvanus, too, the god of the primeval forest, and,
when the forest had receded, the god of the shepherd and the
farmer, the guardian of boundaries, acquired a strange vogue
in what was eminently an age of cities. One is apt, however,
to forget sometimes that it was an age which had also a charming
country life. A Roman cavalry officer in Britain has left
a memorial of his gratitude to Silvanus for the capture of a
wild boar of surpassing size and strength,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1603.</note> which had long
defied the hunter. In one of the forest cantons of the Alps a
procurator of the imperial estates inscribed his gratitude in
a pretty set of verses to the god of the wilds, whose image
was enshrined in the fork of a sacred ash.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1613.</note> It is the record
of many a day passed in lonely forest tracks, coupled with a
prayer to be restored safely to Italian fields and the gardens
of Rome. The nymphs and river gods had all their old honours.
Chapels and hostelries, in the days of Pliny, rose on the banks
of the Clitumnus, where the votaries easily combined pleasure
with religious duty. The nymphs receive votive thanks for
the discovery of hidden springs, or for the reappearance of some
fountain long dried up.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1632, 1634, 1637, 5758a.</note> Aesculapius, who had been naturalised
in Italy since the beginning of the third century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, sprang
to a foremost place in the age of the Antonines. Whether it
was <q>an age of valetudinarians,</q> as has been said, may be
doubtful; but it was an age eagerly in quest of the health
which so often comes from the quiet mind. Whatever we
may think of the powers of the old Olympians, there can be
no doubt about the beneficent influence of the god of Epidaurus.
He was summoned to Rome 300 years before Christ, and
obtained a home in the island in the Tiber, where for ages he
gave his succour in dreams. His worship spread far and wide,
and was one of the last to succumb to the advance of the
Church.<note place="foot">Preller, pp. 406-8; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1580, 1581,
1572.</note>
</p>

<p>
The unassailable permanence of the old religion may perhaps
<pb n="540"/><anchor id="Pg540"/>be still more vividly realised in the long unbroken life of
sacred colleges, such as the Salii and the Fratres Arvales. The
Arval brotherhood was probably the oldest sacred corporation
of Latium, as its liturgy, preserved in the Acta from the reign
of Augustus to that of Gordian, is the oldest specimen of the
Latin language.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2270; cf. Wordsworth,
<hi rend="italic">Specimens of Early Latin</hi>, p. 158;
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2024 sqq.</note> According to the legend, the first members
were the twelve sons of Acca Larentia, the foster-mother of
Romulus, and Romulus himself first held the dignity of master
of the brotherhood.<note place="foot">Preller, p. 293.</note> Its patron goddess, Dea Dia,<note place="foot">Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 74, 275.</note> was, as
her very name suggests, one of those dim shadowy conceptions
dear to old Roman awe, who was worshipped in the still
solitude of ancient groves, on whose trunks no axe of iron
might ever ring,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2059, ob inlatum ferrum,
etc.</note> a power as elusive and multiform to picturing
fancy as the secret forces which shot up the corn ear from the
furrow. The whole tone of the antique ritual savours of a time
when the Latin race was a tribe of farmers, believing with a simple
faith that the yearly increase of their fields depended on the
favour of secret unearthly powers. The meetings of the college
took place on three days in May, the precise dates being fixed and
solemnly announced by their master on the 3rd of January.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> vi. 2040, 2041, 2043; Preller,
p. 294; Oldenberg, <hi rend="italic">De Sacris Fr. Arv.</hi>
p. 5.</note>
The festival began and ended in the master’s house at Rome, the
intermediate day being spent in a sacred grove on the right bank
of the Tiber, about four miles from the city. There was much
feasting, at which the brethren were attended by the Camilli,
four sons of high-born senators. Corn of the new and the
preceding year was touched and blessed; libations and incense
were offered to the goddess, and all the rites were performed
with many changes of costume, which were rigidly observed.<note place="foot">Oldenberg, p. 9.</note>
In the ceremonies which took place in the grove, an expiatory
sacrifice of two porkers and a white cow was always offered,
to atone for the use of any iron implement, or other infringement
of the ancient rubric.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2086.</note> Fat lambs were offered in
sacrifice to Dea Dia, and ancient earthen vessels of rude make,
resembling those of the age of Numa, were adored upon the
altar.<note place="foot">Boissier, i. p. 369; Oldenberg, p.
41.</note> Ears of corn, plucked in some neighbouring field, were
<pb n="541"/><anchor id="Pg541"/>blessed and passed from the hand of one member to another,
and back again in reverse order, and, at last, in the closed
temple, along with solemn dancing, the famous chant was intoned
from ancient scrolls, the words of which had long become
strange even to the antiquary. After another meal in the hall
of the brotherhood, the members passed on to the circus and
gave the signal for the races to begin.<note place="foot">Boissier, i. p. 374; Preller, p. 295.</note>
</p>

<p>
This ritual, so little heard of before the time of Augustus,
is chiefly known to us from the Acta which have been recovered
from the site of the ancient grove. The monuments of it
extend from the reign of Augustus to the year 241 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2023-2113.</note>
Members of the highest aristocracy and princes of the imperial
house appear on its lists. Its membership was a high distinction,
and was sometimes conferred by the potent recommendation
of the emperor.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2056, ex tabella missa Imp.
Vesp. cooptamus, etc.</note> The college evidently became a
great support of the imperial power.
</p>

<p>
The emperors were elected <hi rend="italic">magistri</hi> of the College, and we
can read that Caligula, Nero, Vespasian, and Titus were present
at its meetings. In the opening days of January the most
solemn vows are made in old Roman fashion for the emperor’s
safety, to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, to Salus and Dea Dia,
and they are duly paid by offerings of oxen with gilded horns.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2024.</note>
So servile or so devoted to the throne was the brotherhood,
that their prayers were offered with equal fervour for three
emperors in the awful year 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2051.</note> The vows made for
Galba in the first week of January were alertly transferred to
the cause of Otho the day after Galba’s murder.<note place="foot">Jan. 16, 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi></note> The college
met to sacrifice in honour of Otho’s pontificate on the day
(March 14) on which he set out to meet his doom in the battle
on the Po. Thirteen days after his death, while the spring air
was still tainted with the rotting heaps on the plain of Bedriacum,
vows as fervent or as politic were registered for Vitellius.
In the summer of the following year, the arrival of Vespasian in
the capital was celebrated by the Arval brothers with sacrifices
to Jupiter, Juno, Minerva and Fortuna Redux.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2052.</note>
</p>

<p>
The college, as a matter of course, paid due honour to
the emperor’s birthday and all important anniversaries in his
<pb n="542"/><anchor id="Pg542"/>family. It is interesting to see how for years the Neronian
circle, the Othos and Vitellii, along with Valerii and Cornelii,
appear in all the records of the college.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2040, 2041.</note> It was apparently
devoted to Nero. The brothers celebrate his birthday and all
the civic and sacerdotal honours heaped upon him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2039.</note> They make
vows for his wife Octavia, and soon after, for the safety of
Poppaea in childbirth. The matricide dreaded to return from
Campania after his unnatural crime, but his admirers knew well
the abasement of the Roman aristocracy, and promised him an
enthusiastic reception. The Arval brotherhood, which then
included a Regulus and a Memmius, redeemed the promise,
and voted costly sacrifices for his safe restoration to the
capital.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2042.</note> They execrate the secret plots against his sacred
person, and offer thanksgiving for the detection of the Pisonian
conspiracy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2044; cf. 2029 (Caligula).</note>
</p>

<p>
The extant prayers and congratulations for the safety of
Vespasian are much more quiet and restrained than those for
his cruel son Domitian.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2064, 2067.</note> The public joy at Domitian’s
safe return from ambiguous victories in Germany or Dacia is
faithfully re-echoed, and effusive supplications are recorded for
his safety from all peril and for the eternity of the Empire whose
bounds he has enlarged. There is a sincerer tone in the prayers,
in the spring of 101, for the safe return of Trajan, when he was
setting out for his first campaign on the Danube, and on his
home-coming four years later.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2074.</note> The Arval records of Hadrian’s
reign are chiefly noteworthy for his letters to the college,
recommending his friends for election.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2078.</note> In the reign of
Antoninus Pius the Acta register those perfervid acclamations
which meet us in the later Augustan histories:<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 2086; cf. Flav. Vop. <hi rend="italic">Probus</hi>, c. 12.</note>—<q>O nos
felices qui te Imperatorem videmus; Di te servent in perpetuo;
juvenis triumphis, senex Imperator!</q> The young M. Aurelius
is first mentioned in 155 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> Probably the sincerest utterance
in the Arval liturgies is the petition for his safety, and
that of L. Verus, from peril in the years when the Quadi and
Marcomanni swept down through Rhaetia and the Julian
Alps to the shores of the Adriatic.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2092.</note>
</p>
    
<pb n="543"/><anchor id="Pg543"/>

<p>
It was thus that the antique ritual of a rustic brotherhood
was converted into a potent support of the imperial power.
No part of the Augustan revival was perhaps so successful.
Probably few of the emperors, or of the aristocratic brothers
who intoned the litany for the safety of the imperial house,
had much faith in its efficacy. But the ceremony linked the
principate with the most venerable traditions of Latium, and
with Romulus the first master of the college. When we read
the minute and formal record of these coarse sacrifices and
rude, fantastic rites, with the chanting of prayers no longer
understood, we are amazed at the prolongation for so many
ages of religious ideas which the Roman mind might appear to
have outgrown. Yet in such inquiries there is often a danger
of treating society as a uniform mass, moving together along
the same lines, and permeated through all its strata by the
same influences. In another chapter we have shown that the
masses were probably never so superstitious as in the second
century. And the singular thing is that the influx of foreign
religions, due to the wide conquests of Rome, never to the end
seems to have shaken the supreme attachment of the people
to their ancient gods. It is true that the drift towards
monotheism was felt even among the crowd. But while the
educated might find expression for that tendency in the adoration
of Isis or the Sun, the dim monotheism of the people turned to
the glorification of Jupiter. Dedications to him are the most
numerous in all lands. He is often linked with other gods or all
the gods,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 5788; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1245, 1290.</note> but he is always supreme. And, while he is the lord
of tempest and thunder,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1238, Fulguratori, 1240, 1271,
Jovi O. M. tempestatum potenti.</note> he is also addressed by epithets which
show that he is becoming a moral and spiritual power. On
many a stone he appears as the governor and preserver of all
things, monitor, guardian, and heavenly patron, highest and
best of the heavenly hierarchy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii, 1032, 1948, 1590; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi>
1269, 1248, 1225, 1269; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii.
1066.</note> Yet it is equally clear that
other gods are worshipped in the same spirit as of old. Roman
religion was essentially practical. Prayer and vow were the
means to win temporal blessings. The gods were expected, in
return for worship, to be of use to the devotee. It is evident
from the inscriptions that this conception of religion was as
<pb n="544"/><anchor id="Pg544"/>prevalent in the age of the Antonines, or of the oriental princes,
as it was under the Republic. The sailor still offers thanks
for his preservation to Neptune and the gods of the sea.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1335.</note> The
successful merchant still honours Mercury.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1410.</note> Minerva Memor
receives thanks for succour in sickness. A lady of Placentia
even pays her vows for the recovery of her hair.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1428, 1429, restitutione facta sibi capillorum.</note> The reappearance
of a hidden spring is still attributed to the grace of
the Nymphs.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1634.</note> And in many a temple the healing power of
Aesculapius is acknowledged by grateful devotees.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 1572, 1576.</note>
</p>

<p>
A more difficult problem is presented by the attitude of the
cultivated class to the old mythologies. Since the days of
Xenophanes and of Plato, philosophy had revolted against the
degradation of the Divine character by ancient legend. It had
taught for ages the unity of the mysterious Power or Goodness
which lies behind the shifting scene of sense. Moreover,
philosophy for generations had deserted the heights of speculative
inquiry, and addressed itself to the task of applying the
spiritual truth which the schools had won to the problems of
practical religion and human life. Alike in Cicero, in Seneca,
in Plutarch, and M. Aurelius, there are conceptions of God and
the worship due to Him, of prayer, of the relation of conduct
to religion, which seem irreconcilable with conformity to the
old religion of Rome. How could a man, nourished on such
spiritual ideas and refined by a thousand years of growing
culture, take part in a gross materialistic worship, and even
gallantly defend it against all assailants?
</p>

<p>
The conformity of highly instructed minds to ancient
systems which their reason has outgrown is not always to be
explained by the easy imputation of dishonesty. And that
explanation is even less admissible in ancient than in modern
times. Roman religion did not demand any profession of faith
in any theory of the unseen; all it required was ceremonial
purity and exactness. And the Roman world was never
scandalised by the spectacle of a notorious sceptic or libertine
holding the office of chief pontiff. If a man were more
scrupulous himself, philosophy, whether of the Porch or the
Academy, came to his aid. It would tell him that frail
<pb n="545"/><anchor id="Pg545"/>humanity, unable to comprehend the Infinite God, had parcelled
out and detached his various powers and virtues, which it
adored under material forms according to its varying needs.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> ii. 7, 5, fragilis et
laboriosa mortalitas in partes ista
digessit infirmitatis suae memor, ut
portionibus coleret quisque quo maxime
indigeret.</note>
Or it found a place for all the gods of heathendom, as
ministering or mediating spirits in the vast abyss which
separates us from the unapproachable and Infinite Spirit.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> supra, p. 425 sqq.</note> If
the legends which had gathered around the popular gods
offended a tender moral sense, men were taught that the
apparent grossness was an allegorical husk, or a freak of poetic
fancy which concealed a wholesome truth. Thus a pantheist
or monotheist, who would never have created such a religious
system for himself, was trained to cultivate a double self in
matters of religion, to worship reverently with the crowd, and
to believe with Zeno or with Plato.
</p>

<p>
The heathen champion in the dialogue of Minucius Felix
maintains that, in the dimness and uncertainty of things,
the safest course is to hold fast to the gods of our fathers.<note place="foot">Min. Fel. <hi rend="italic">Octav.</hi> c. 6, quanto
venerabilius ac melius antistitem veritatis
majorum excipere disciplinam,
religiones traditas colere, deos, quos a
parentibus ante imbutus es timere
quam nosse familiarius, adorare, etc.</note>
The inclination of the sceptic was fortified by the conservative
instinct of the Latin race and its love of precedent and
precision of form. Moreover the religion of Numa was
probably more than any other involved and intertwined with
the whole life of the people. It penetrated the whole fabric
of society; it consecrated and dignified every public function,
and every act or incident of private life. To desert the
ancient gods was to cut oneself off from Roman society, as the
Christians were sternly made to feel. No established Church
in modern Christendom has probably ever so succeeded in
identifying itself with the national life in all its aspects.
Alike under the Republic and under the Empire, religion was
inseparable from patriotism. The imperial pontiff was bound
to watch over the purity and continuity of the Latin rites. He
might be a scoffer like Nero, or a spiritually-minded Stoic like
M. Aurelius, an Isiac devotee like Commodus, or devoted to the
Syrian worships like the Oriental princes of the third century.
But he took his duties seriously. He would dance with the Salii,
<pb n="546"/><anchor id="Pg546"/>or accept with gratitude the mastership of the Arval brotherhood,
or order a <hi rend="italic">lectisternium</hi> to ward off a pestilence or a menacing
invasion. The imperial colleges still held their meetings on
the eve of the revolution of Theodosius. Antiquarian nobles
still discussed nice questions of ritual in the reign of Honorius.
At the end of the fifth century the Lupercalia were still
celebrated with coarse, half-savage rites which went back to the
prehistoric times.<note place="foot">Virg. <hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> viii. 343; Ov. <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>,
ii. 267; Baronius, <hi rend="italic">Ann. Eccl.</hi> viii. 60;
Gibbon, c. 36; Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Fest.</hi> p. 310.</note> The imperial policy, founded by Augustus,
no doubt inspired much of this conformity. But old Roman
sentiment, the passion expressed with such moving eloquence
by Symmachus, to feel himself in touch with a distant past<note place="foot">Sym. <hi rend="italic">Relat.</hi> 3.</note>
through a chain of unbroken continuity, was the great support
of the State religion in the fourth century as in the first. Yet,
among the great nobles who were its last champions—Flavianus,
Praetextatus, or Volusianus—there was a spiritual craving for
which the religion provided little satisfaction. They sought it
in the rites and mysteries of Eastern lands which had little in
common with the old Roman religious sentiment. In these
alien rites they found a new religious atmosphere. The priest,
set apart from the world, with his life-long obligations and the
daily offices in the shrine, becomes in some way a minister
to the spiritual life of his flock. Instead of cold ceremonial
observance, ecstatic emotion is aroused, often to a degree which
was perilous to character. Through a series of sacraments, with
ascetic preparation for them, the votary rose under priestly
guidance to some vision of the eternal world, with a new
conception of sin; this life and the next were linked in a moral
sequence, with tremendous issues of endless beatitude or endless
degradation. In a temple of Magna Mater, Isis, or Mithra in
the reign of Julian, we are far away from the worship of the
Lares and the offering of a heifer to Dea Dia in the grove on
the Tiber. We are travelling towards the spiritual mystery
and sacramental consolations of the mediaeval Church.
</p>
</div><div type="chapter" n="4" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="547"/><anchor id="Pg547"/>
<index index="toc" level1="IV. Magna Mater"/><index index="pdf" level1="IV. Magna Mater"/>
<head>CHAPTER IV</head>

<head type="sub">MAGNA MATER</head>

<p>
The earliest invader from the East of the sober decorum of
old Roman religion, and almost the last to succumb, was
Magna Mater of Pessinus. There is no pagan cult which S.
Augustine, and many of the Fathers before him, assail with
such indignant contempt as hers.<note place="foot">Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, ii. 4; Tertull.
<hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> 13; <hi rend="italic">Adv. Marc.</hi> i. 13.</note> And indeed it was long
regarded with suspicion by old Romans of the cultivated class.
For generations after her reception on the Palatine, no Roman
was permitted to enter her official service. But there was
something in that noisy and bloody ritual, and in the cruel,
ascetic sacrifice of its devotees, which exercised an irresistible
power over the imagination of the vulgar; and even Lucretius
felt a certain imaginative awe of the tower-crowned figure
drawn by lions and adored by the cities of many lands.<note place="foot">Lucret. ii. 600.</note>
Varro, who probably had no great love for the un-Roman
ritual, found a place for the Phrygian goddess in his théodicée.<note place="foot">Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, ii. 8, vii. 24.</note>
Her baptism of blood in the taurobolium was a rite of such
strange enthralling influence that it needed all the force of the
Christian Empire to abolish it. And on many of the last
inscriptions of the fourth century the greatest names in the
Roman aristocracy leave the record of their cleansing in the
curious phrase <hi rend="italic">renatus in aeternum</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 499, 504, 509, 510,
511, 512; xii. 1782, 1567; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1899,
1890, 2335.</note> In his youth S. Augustine
had seen processions of effeminate figures with dripping locks,
painted faces, and soft womanish bearing, passing along the
streets of Carthage, and begging alms of the crowd. His
horror at the memory of the scene probably springs almost
<pb n="548"/><anchor id="Pg548"/>as much from the manly instincts of the Roman as from
the detestation of the Christian moralist for a debasing
superstition.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, ii. 4, 7, 8; vi. 7; vii.
24.</note>
</p>

<p>
But S. Augustine knew well the power of the superstition.
For more than 600 years the Great Mother had been enthroned
on the Palatine; for more than 300 years she had captivated
the remotest provinces of the West.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 179 (Spain, 108 p. Chr.);
iii. 1100, 1443 (Dacia, p. Chr. 110);
<hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5839 (Portugal).</note> In the terror of the
Second Punic War, 204 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, she had been summoned by
solemn embassy from her original home at Pessinus in Galatia.
In obedience to a sibylline command, the Roman youth
with purest hands, together with the Roman matrons, had
welcomed her at Ostia.<note place="foot">Liv. 29, 10.</note> The ship which bore her up the
Tiber,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1906, Navisalviae et matri D.
(<hi rend="italic">v.</hi> note).</note> when it grounded on a shoal, had been sent forward
on its way, to vindicate her calumniated virtue, by the touch
of a virgin of the Claudian house.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>, iv. 305; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Frag.</hi> 80;
Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> c. 2.</note> A decree of the Senate
in 191 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> had given the strange goddess a home on the
Palatine, hard by the shrine of Apollo; and the great
Megalesian festival in April was founded.<note place="foot">Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Fest.</hi> p. 70.</note> But the foreign
character of the cult was long maintained. It was a time
when the passion for religious excitement was in the air, and
when its excesses had to be restrained by all the forces of the
State. No Roman was permitted to accept the Phrygian
priesthood for a century after the coming of the Great
Mother.<note place="foot">Val. Max. vii. 7, 6; Goehler, <hi rend="italic">De
Matr. Magn. Cultu</hi>, p. 10.</note> But towards the end of the Republic, the goddess
had captured all imaginations, and her priests and symbols
meet us in all the poets of the great age.<note place="foot">Lucret. ii. 600; Virg. <hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> ix.
620; x. 220; Ov. <hi rend="italic">A. Am.</hi> i. 507;
Prop. iii. 17, 35; cf. Preller, p. 484.</note> Augustus restored
her temple; some of his freedmen were among her priests;<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 496.</note>
Livia is pictured with the crown of towers upon her brow.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 12.</note>
Then came a long interval, till the death of Nero, during
which the Phrygian goddess is hardly heard of.<note place="foot">Yet cf. D. Cass. lxi. 20,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἐκιθαρῴδεσέ τε Ἄττιν ὁ Αὔγουστος</foreign>.</note> With the
accession of the Flavians the eastern cults finally entered on
a long and unchallenged reign. Vespasian restored the temple
of the Great Mother at Herculaneum, which had been thrown
<pb n="549"/><anchor id="Pg549"/>down by an earthquake.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 1406. Imp. Vesp. templum
M. M. terrae motu conlapsum
restituit.</note> In the reign of Trajan her worship
had penetrated to the Spanish peninsula,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> ii. 179 (108 p. Chr.); cf. <hi rend="italic">Or.
Henz.</hi> 5839.</note> and she is found,
along with other Eastern deities, in the towns of the new
province of Dacia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 1100, 1443.</note> The first glimpses of the taurobolium
appear before the middle of the second century, and the goddess
figures on the coins of Antoninus Pius.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x. 1596 (Naples, p. Chr. 134).</note> A taurobolium
for that emperor was offered <q>with intention</q> at Lyons in
160 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2322.</note> and there are several dedications to Magna Mater
in the same reign made by colleges of the <hi rend="italic">Dendrophori</hi> at Ostia.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 15.</note>
Tertullian tells how a high priest of Cybele vainly offered his
blood for the safety of M. Aurelius, seven days after the Emperor
had died in his quarters on the Danube.<note place="foot">Tertull. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> 25; D. Cass. lxxi. 33.</note> It does not fall
within the scope of our present inquiry to trace the immense
popularity of the worship under the princes of the third
century. That was the period of the great triumph of the
spiritual powers of the East. At the end of the fourth century
the Great Mother and Mithra were in the van of the pagan
resistance to the religious revolution of Theodosius and his
sons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 501 (p. Chr. 383); 509,
511, 510, 500.</note>
</p>

<p>
The worship of Cybele, coming from the same regions as the
Trojan ancestors of Rome, was at first a patrician cult.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 60; Ov. <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>, iv. 251,

<lg>
<l>Cum Trojam Aeneas Italos portaret in agros,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Est dea sacriferas paene secuta rates.</l>
</lg></note>
Members of the proudest houses bore a part in welcoming her
to a place in the Roman pantheon.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi> 293.</note> Yet, as we have seen,
Romans were for generations forbidden to enrol themselves
among her effeminate priesthood. By a curious contradiction
of sentiment, people were fascinated by the ritual, while they
despised the celebrants. The legend which was interpreted by
Stoic and Neoplatonist as full of physical or metaphysical
meanings,<note place="foot">Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, vi. 8; vii. 25;
Jul. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> v. p. 161 <hi rend="small">D</hi>.</note> had also elements of human interest which appealed
to the masses, always eager for emotional excitement. The love
of the Great Mother for a fair youth, his unfaithfulness, and
penitential self-mutilation under the pine-tree; the passionate
mourning for lost love, and then the restoration of the self-made
victim, attended by a choir of priests for ever, who had made
<pb n="550"/><anchor id="Pg550"/>the same cruel sacrifice<note place="foot">There were many variations of the
myth; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Goehler, pp. 2, 3; <anchor id="corr550"/><corr sic="Foucart">Foucart,</corr>
<hi rend="italic">Assoc. Rel.</hi> p. 89; Ov. <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>, iv. 223.</note>—all this, so alien to old Roman
religious sentiment, triumphed over it in the end by novelty
and tragic interest. The legend was developed into a drama,
which, at the vernal festival of the goddess, was produced
with striking, if not artistic, effect. On the first day the
Dendrophori bore the sacred tree, wreathed with violets, to
the temple. There was then a pause for a day, and, on the
third, the priests, with frantic gestures and dishevelled hair,
abandoned themselves to the wildest mourning, lacerating their
arms and shoulders with wounds, from which the blood flowed
in torrents. Severe fasting accompanied these self-inflicted
tortures. Then came a complete change of sensation. On the
day called Hilaria the votaries gave themselves up to ecstasies
of joy, to celebrate the restoration of Attis. On the last day
of the festival a solemn procession took its way to the brook
Almon, to bathe the goddess in its waters.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 64; Preller, p. 485.</note> The sacred stone,
brought originally from her home in Asia, and the most sacred
symbol of the worship, wrapped in robes, was borne upon a
car with chants and music, and that gross, unabashed
naturalism which so often shocks and surprises us in pagan
ritual till we trace it to its source.
</p>

<p>
The government long treated the cult of Cybele as a foreign
worship.<note place="foot">Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 70; cf.
Foucart, <hi rend="italic">Assoc. Rel.</hi> p. 88, for similar
treatment at Athens.</note> The title of its great festival is Greek. Yet before
the close of the Republic, Romans are found enrolled in its
priesthoods and sacred colleges, and long lists of these official
votaries can be gathered from the inscriptions of the imperial
period. The archigallus, or high priest, appears often on the
Italian and provincial monuments. He is found at Merida,
Capua, Ostia, and Lyons, in Numidia and Portugal.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 3810; viii. 8203; xii.
1782; ii. 5260.</note> He must
have performed his part at many a taurobolium, crowned with
laurel wreaths, wearing his mitre and ear-rings and armlets, with
the image of Attis on his breast.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xii. 1782; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2325,
6031; Goehler, p. 40.</note> The names of the ordinary
priests abound, from the freedman of the house of Augustus to
the great nobles of the reign of Theodosius and Honorius.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 12; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 511,
504, 500.</note> The
priesthood was sometimes held for life, or for a long term of years.
<pb n="551"/><anchor id="Pg551"/>A priest at Salonae in Dalmatia had punctually performed the
sacred offices for seventeen years.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 2920; xii. 1567.</note> Women were naturally
admitted to the priesthood of a cult whose central interest was
a woman’s love and grief. Sometimes they are lowly freedwomen
with Greek names, sometimes they bear the proudest
names in the Roman aristocracy.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> x. 6074; vi. 502, 508; <hi rend="italic">Or.
Henz.</hi> 7200 (Acte), 2330, 1902, 2371,
2319, 2325; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 4322, 4326.</note> The Dendrophori, who on
festive days bore the sacred tree, formed a religious college, and
their record appears on many monuments of Italian and provincial
towns—Como, Ostia, and Cumae, Caesarea (Afr.), Valentia,
and Lyons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 7336, 2322, 6031, 4109,
7197; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 9401.</note> Other colleges were the Cannophori and Cernophori,
the keepers of the mystic symbols.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 45.</note> The chanters,
drummers, and cymbal players were indispensable at great ceremonial
scenes, such as the taurobolium,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 1782.</note> and were arranged in
graded ranks. Of a lower degree were the vergers and apparitors,
who watched over the chapels of the goddess.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2325, 2984.</note> And, lastly, there
were the simple worshippers, who also formed themselves into
guilds, with all the usual officers of such corporations. This
cult, like so many others, existed not only for ceremonial rite,
but for fellowship and social exhilaration, and, through its
many gradations of religious privilege, it must have drawn vast
numbers into the sacred service in the times of the Empire.
</p>

<p>
But the pages of Apuleius, and other authorities, show us
that, beside the official clergy and collegiate members, there
were, as happens to all popular religions, a mass of unlicensed
camp followers and mere disreputable vagrants, who used the
name of the Great Mother to exploit the ignorant devotion
and religious excitability of the rustic folk. The romance of
Apuleius, as Dr. Mahaffy has suggested, is probably derived
from earlier sources, and dressed up to titillate the prurient
tastes of a degraded society.<note place="foot">Mahaffy, <hi rend="italic">The Greek World under
Roman Sway</hi>, p. 295 sqq.</note> Yet its pictures of country life
in Thessaly, although they may not be always locally accurate,
can hardly be purely imaginative. The scenes may not be
always Thessalian, but that they are in the main true pictures
of country life in the Antonine age may be proved from other
authorities. Apuleius was too careful an artist to sever himself
<pb n="552"/><anchor id="Pg552"/>altogether from the actual life of his time. And what a picture
it is! The air positively thrills with daemonic terror and
power. Witches and lewd sorceresses abound; the solitary
inn has its weird seductions; the lonely country cottage has
its tragedy of lawless love or of chaste devotion to the dead.
Brigands in mountain fastnesses divide their far-gathered spoil,
and hold debate on plans of future lawless adventure. Mountain
solitudes, and lonely villages or castles among the woods, are
aroused by the yelping hounds, who start the boar from his
lair, while the faithless traitor places his friend at its mercy.
We meet the travelling cheese merchant, and the noble exile
on his way to Zacynthus. We watch the raid on the banker’s
house at Thebes, and the peasants setting their dogs on the
passing traveller; the insolence of the wandering legionary;
the horrors of the slave prison, with its wasted, starved, and
branded forms; the amours of buxom wives, and the comic concealment
or discovery of lovers, in the manner of Boccaccio.
It is only too certain that the vileness and superstition which
Apuleius has depicted may easily find a parallel on the Roman
stage, or in the pages of Martial.
</p>

<p>
In all this social panorama, romantic, amusing, or disgusting,
there is no more repulsive, and probably no truer scene
than that in which the wandering priests of the Syrian goddess
appear. That deity, like many others of Eastern origin, was
often identified with the Great Mother. Apuleius probably
confounded them; the rites of their worships were often the
same, and the picture in Apuleius may be taken to represent
the orgies of many a wandering troop of professed devotees of
the Great Mother in the age of the Antonines.<note place="foot">Réville, <hi rend="italic">Rel. unter den Sev.</hi> p. 65; Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> viii. 24 (<hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Hildenbrand’s notes.)</note> The leader
is an old eunuch, with wild straggling locks—a man of the
foulest morals, carrying about with him an image of the goddess,
and levying alms from the superstition of the rustics. He is
attended by a crew worthy of him, wretches defiled with all
the worst vices of the ancient world, and shamelessly parading
their degradation. But they combine a shrewd eye to business
with this wild licence. They know all the arts to catch the
fancy of the mob of clowns, whose grey dull lives and inbred
superstition make them eager for any display which will
intoxicate them with the novelty of a violent sensation. These
<pb n="553"/><anchor id="Pg553"/>people are on that level where lust and the passion for blood
and suffering readily league themselves with religious excitement.
After a night of moral horrors, the foul brotherhood go
forth in various costume to win the largesses of the countryside.
With painted cheeks and robes of white or yellow,
crossed with purple stripes, their arms bared to the shoulder,
and carrying swords or axes, they dance along wildly to the
sound of the flute.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> viii. c. 27 (580); cf.
Aug. <hi rend="italic">De Civ. Dei</hi>, ii. 4.</note> With obscene gesticulation and discordant
shrieks they madly bite their arms or lacerate them
with knives. One of the band, as if seized with special
inspiration, heaving and panting under the foul afflatus, shrieks
out the confession of some sin against the holy rites, and claims
the penalty from his own hands.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> viii. c. 28 (583).</note> With hard knotted scourge
he belabours himself, while the blood flows in torrents. At
last the cruel frenzy exhausts itself, and obtains its reward in
the offerings of the spectators. Fine flour and cheese, milk
and wine, coins of copper and silver, are eagerly showered upon
the impostors, and as eagerly gathered in.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 28 (585).</note> Surprised in
frightful orgies of vice, the scoundrels have at last to retreat
before the outraged moral sense of the villagers. They decamp
during the night, and on the morrow once more find comfortable
quarters in the house of a leading citizen who is devoted to
the service of the gods, and blind to the imposture of their
professing ministers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 30 (589).</note>
</p>

<p>
The episode in Apuleius suggests some curious questions as
to the moral effect of these emotional cults. That in their
early stages they had no elevating moral influence,—nay, that
their votaries might combine a strict conformity to rite with
great looseness of life,—is only too certain. The Delias and
Cynthias of the poets, who kept the fasts of Isis, were assuredly
not models of virtue. The assumption of the tonsure and
linen habit by a debauchee like Commodus does not reassure
us. Yet princes of high character in the second and the
third centuries lent the countenance of imperial power to the
worships of the East.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 1406; Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Alex.
Sev.</hi> c. 37.</note> And the Mother of the Gods found
her last and most gallant defenders among great nobles of
high repute and sincere pagan piety in the last years of
<pb n="554"/><anchor id="Pg554"/>heathenism in the West. It was a strange transformation.
Yet the problem is not perhaps insoluble. A religion may
deteriorate as its authority over society becomes more assured
with age. But, in times of moral renovation, and in the face
of powerful spiritual rivalries, a religion may purge itself of
the impurities of youth. Religious systems may also be
elevated by the growing moral refinement of the society to
which they minister. It is only thus that we can explain the
undoubted fact that the Phrygian and Egyptian worships,
originally tainted with the grossness of naturalism, became
vehicles of a warm religious emotion, and provided a stimulus
to a higher life. The idealism of humanity, by a strange
alchemy, can marvellously transform the most unpromising
materials. And he would make a grave mistake who should
treat the Isis and Osiris, the Mater Deum or the Attis, of
the reign of Augustus as representing the same ideals in the
reign of Gratian. But these Eastern cults contained a germ,
even in their earliest days, of their great future development
and power. The old religion of Latium, along with much
that was sound and grave and fortifying to character, was also
hard and cold and ceremonial. It could mould and consecrate
a militant and conquering state; it did little to satisfy the
craving for moral regeneration or communion with a Higher
Power. It could not appease the sense of error and frailty
by ghostly comfort and sacramental absolution. It was, moreover,
wanting in that warmth of interest and sympathy, linking
the human and Divine, which has helped to make Christianity
the religion of Western civilisation, and which in a feeble adumbration
made the paganism of the East a momentary rival of
the Church. These Eastern cults, often originating in gross
symbolism of the alternations and recurring processes of
nature,<note place="foot">Firm. Matern. <hi rend="italic">De Err. Prof. Rel.</hi> c. 2, 3.</note> often arousing a dangerous excitability and an unregulated
emotion, yet contained the germ of a religious spirit
far more akin to ours than the old austere Latin creed. A
divine death and restoration, the alternation of joy and sorrow
at a divine event, instinct with human interest, calming
expiation and cleansing from the sins which burdened the
conscience,—above all, the hope of a coming life, stamped on
the imagination by symbol and spectacle,—these were the
<pb n="555"/><anchor id="Pg555"/>elements which, operating on imperious religious yearnings,
gave a fresh life to paganism, and prepared or deferred the
victory of the Church. The religion of the Great Mother
seems at first sight to offer the poorest promise of any moral
message or spiritual support. It expressed at first the feelings
of rude rustics at the recurring mortality and resurrection of
material life in the order of the seasons. The element of human
feeling which it contained was grossly expressed in bloody
rites of mutilation. This cult was often defiled and disgraced
by a crew of effeminate and lustful impostors. Yet the Thessalian
villagers in Apuleius, who chased these vagabonds from
their fields, evidently expected something better from them.
They despised the foul hypocrites, but they did not cease to
believe in their religion. The spiritual instinct of humanity
triumphed, as it has so often done, over the vices of a historical
system, extracted the good in it, rejected the evil, and
made it an organ of some sort of spiritual life. Thus the Great
Mother became the Mother of all, enthroned beside the Father
of gods and men. She wears the chaste honours of the Virgin
Goddess. Attis and her love for Attis are similarly transformed.
In the syncretism of the age, which strove to gather
up all the forces of heathenism and make them converge
towards a spiritual unity, Magna Mater and Attis leagued
their forces with the conquering Mithra.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 66; Goehler, p. 29;
Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon. figurés de Mithra</hi>,
Introd. p. 333; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2329, 2330, 1900;
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 497, 500, 511; cf. <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> x.
1596, where the taurobolium is connected
with Venus Coelesta (<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>);
Preller, p. 486.</note> In the taurobolium
there was developed a ritual, in which, coarse and materialistic
as it was, paganism made, in however imperfect form, its
nearest approach to the religion of the Cross.
</p>

<p>
The greatest and most impressive rite in the worship of
Cybele was the taurobolium. There was none which so
excited the suspicion and indignation of the Christian apologists,
from Tertullian to Prudentius, because in its ceremony of the
cleansing blood, and in its supposed effects in moral regeneration
and remission of sins, it seemed invented by the ingenuity
of daemons to be a travesty of the sacrifice on Calvary.<note place="foot">Tertull. <hi rend="italic">De Praescrip. Haeret.</hi> 40;
Firm. Matern. <hi rend="italic">De Err. Prof. Relig.</hi> c. 27,
neminem aput idola profusus sanguis
munit ... polluit sanguis iste, non
redimit.... Tauribolium quid vel
criobolium scelerata te sanguinis labe
perfundit? S. Paulin. Nol. <hi rend="italic">Poem.
Ult.</hi> 112-117.</note> It is
<pb n="556"/><anchor id="Pg556"/>possible that the last champions of the ancient cults may
have had some such defiant purpose when they inscribed, in
the record of their cleansing, the words <q><hi rend="italic">in aeternum renatus</hi>.</q>
But in its origin there can be no doubt that the rite was
purely heathen. Its appearance in the Phrygian ceremonial
is comparatively late. The worship of Magna Mater was
essentially an orgiastic cult, and theologically arid. But the
syncretism of the second and third centuries came to its
support. And the worships of Persia, Syria, and Phrygia were
ready to coalesce, and to borrow from one another symbols and
doctrines which gave satisfaction to the spiritual wants of
the time. The taurobolium, with its ideas of cleansing and
immortality, passed in the Antonine age from the worship of
Anaitis of Cappadocia to the worship of Magna Mater, and
gave the Great Mother a new hold upon the religious consciousness.
In the earlier votive tablets the name of the rite is
<hi rend="italic">tauropolium</hi>. Anaitis had been identified with the Artemis
Tauropolus of Brauron, whose legend, by popular etymology,
came to be identified, as Milesian exploration spread in the
Euxine, with the cult of the cruel goddess of the Tauric
Chersonese.<note place="foot">Cumont, Introd. pp. 236, 333;
Herodot. iv. 103; Eur. <hi rend="italic">Iph. T.</hi> 1455;
Strab. v. 3, § 12, p. 240.</note> And by another etymological freak and the
change of a letter, we arrive at the bull-slaughtering rite of
the later Empire. Whether the taurobolium ever became
part of the service of Mithra is a disputed point.<note place="foot">Cumont, p. 334; Gasquet, <hi rend="italic">Culte de
Mithra</hi>, p. 75; Cumont, Introd. p. 334,
n. 5; Réville, <hi rend="italic">Rel. unter den Sev.</hi> p.
93, takes an opposite view.</note> Certainly
the syncretistic tendency of the age, the fact that the most
popular Mithraist symbol was the slaying of the mystic bull,
and the record of the taurobolium on so many inscriptions
dedicated to Mithra, would prepare us for the conclusion that
the rite was in the end common to the Persian and the
Phrygian deities. Whatever may be the truth on this point,
the two worships, in the last ages of heathenism in the West,
were close allies. Attis tended more and more to become a
solar deity in the age which culminated in the sun-worship
of Julian.<note place="foot">Donsbach, <hi rend="italic">Die
    <anchor id="corr556"/><corr sic="raümliche">räumliche</corr> Verbreitung
des Mithrasdienstes</hi>, pp. 8, 9.</note> Heliolatry, the last refuge of monotheism in
heathendom, which refused to accept the religion of Galilee,
swept all the great worships of strong vitality into its system,
<pb n="557"/><anchor id="Pg557"/>softened their differences, accentuated their similarities, by
every effort of fancy, false science, or reckless etymology, and
in the end, <q>Sol invictus</q> and Mithra were left masters of
the field. But Magna Mater, however originally unworthy,
shared in the victory. If she could lend the support of an
accredited clergy, recognised for ages by the State, and the
impressive rite of the bloody baptism, Mithra, on the other
hand, had a moral and spiritual message, an assurance of a
future life, and an enthralling force of mystic and sacramental
communion, which made his alliance even more valuable. The
Great Mother, indeed, admitted women to the ranks of her clergy,
while the rites of Mithra probably excluded them.<note place="foot">This is rendered doubtful by
Porphyr. <hi rend="italic">De Abstin.</hi> iv. 16,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὡς τοὺς μὲν μετέχοντας τῶν αὐτῶν ὀργίων μύστας
    λέοντας καλεῖν (εἰώθασιν). τὰς δὲ γυναῖκας ὑαίνας</foreign>
    (altered by Felicianus to <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">λεαίνας</foreign>);
cf. Gasquet, p. 98.</note> And thus
a Fabia Aconia Paulina, while her husband, Vettius Agorius
Praetextatus, could inscribe himself <q>pater patrum,</q> had no
Mithraist grade which she could place beside her consecration
to Hecate and the Eleusinian goddesses.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 1778, 9.</note> But the pair were
united in the sacrament of the taurobolium. And the Great
Mother probably never had purer or sincerer devotees.
</p>

<p>
When the taurobolium was first introduced into the West
is uncertain.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 55; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 1596;
<anchor id="corr557"/><corr sic="(Puteoli">Puteoli</corr>, p. Chr. 134; taurobol.
Veneris Caelestae (<hi rend="italic">sic</hi>).</note> The earliest monument belongs to <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 134 in
the reign of Hadrian, when the ceremony seems to be connected
with the Celestial Venus. The most famous inscription, which
connects the rite with the Great Mother, is of the year 160
<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, when one L. Aemilius Carpus, an Augustalis, and a member
of the college of the Dendrophori at Lyons, had the ceremony
performed <q>for the safety</q> of Antoninus Pius and the imperial
house.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2382; Goehler, p. 55; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
viii. 8203.</note> The rite was celebrated at the command of the goddess,
or on the inspired advice of the priest.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2327, ex jussu ipsius; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
xii. 1782, ex vaticinatione Archigalli;
cf. xii. 4321, 4323.</note> It took place generally
in early spring, and was often prolonged over three or four days.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 1782.</note>
It was a costly rite, and the expense was sometimes borne by
the community, who made an offertory for the purpose.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xii. 4321 (<hi rend="italic">stipe collata</hi>); at
private expense, xii. 1568.</note> The
ceremony was superintended by the xvviri, and attended by a
great concourse of the people, with the magistrates at their
<pb n="558"/><anchor id="Pg558"/>head. It is needless to describe again the scene, so well known
from the verses of Prudentius, in which the consecrated bull
is with solemn forms slaughtered on a high-raised platform, and
bathes with the streams of his blood the votary placed in a
trench below.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Peristeph.</hi> x. 1011; cf. Duruy, v.
p. 743.</note> The rite was believed to impart some sort of
strength and purification, the effect of which lasted for twenty
years, when the sacrament was often renewed. It was, as we
have seen, sometimes performed <q>with intention,</q> for the reigning
emperor and his house,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 1311, 251, 1822, 4332;
<hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2332.</note> and furnishes another example of
the manner in which religion was employed to buttress the
power of the Caesars. A considerable number of monuments
in Italy and the provinces commemorate, in a phrase perhaps
borrowed from the Church, the gratitude of one <q>born again
to eternal life.</q> It is probable that the coarse ritual often
expressed only an external and materialistic conception of
religious influence. On the other hand, following upon, or
closely connected with initiation into the mysteries of Mithra,
it may easily have become a symbol of moral and spiritual
truth, or at any rate a record of moral aspiration.
</p>

<p>
For, indeed, in the syncretism and monotheistic drift of the
age, the more powerful worships lost the hardness of their
original lines and tended to absorption and assimilation.
There was little strife or repulsion among these cults; they
borrowed freely legends and ritual practice from one another;
even characteristic insignia were interchanged. The legend
and tone of the Cybele worship naturally linked her with
others sprung from the same region, such as the Syrian goddess,
Celestial Venus, and Bellona.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 34; Réville, p. 66;
Preller, p. 488; Cumont, Introd. p.
333.</note> Fanaticism, self-mutilation,
expiation by blood, were the common bond between them.
The fierce goddess of Cappadocia, who had visited Sulla in a
dream, was probably first introduced to Roman devotion in his
time. Her dark-robed priests and priestesses were familiar
figures in the Augustan age, gashing themselves like the Galli of
Magna Mater, catching the blood in shields, and dashing it
over their train of followers who believed in its powers of
expiation. But Magna Mater, as her name promises, assumed
a milder character, and was identified sometimes with Maia,
<pb n="559"/><anchor id="Pg559"/>Ops, and Minerva; sometimes with Demeter, Bona Dea, and
Fauna, as Attis was identified with Hercules.<note place="foot">Goehler, p. 29.</note> In the last age
the great goddess became the universal Mother, full of tenderness
and grace, and giving peace through her cleansing rites.
Hers is, along with the cults of Isis and Mithra, which will
next claim our attention, an example of the process of Divine
evolution, by which, in the painful progress of humanity, the
crude efforts of religious symbolism are purged and elevated.
It is an example of the way in which the human spirit, refusing
to break with its past, sometimes succeeds, if only for a
time, in putting new wine into old bottles.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="5" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="560"/><anchor id="Pg560"/>
<index index="toc" level1="V. Isis and Serapis"/><index index="pdf" level1="V. Isis and Serapis"/>
<head>CHAPTER V</head>

<head type="sub">ISIS AND SERAPIS</head>

<p>
The worship of Isis and Serapis, reckoning from the day when
it established itself in the port of Athens, had a reign of more
than seven centuries over the peoples of Europe. Its influence
in the western provinces of the Empire and in the capital may
be roughly said to cover a period of 500 years. It was not,
indeed, the old native worship of the valley of the Nile which
won such an empire over cultivated intellects from Chaeronea
to the Thames. The ancient Egyptian worship underwent vast
transformations in the crucible of all creeds at Alexandria.
It was captured and utilised for political purposes by the
Ptolemies.<note place="foot">Lafaye, <hi rend="italic">Culte des divinités d’Alexandrie</hi>,
p. 15; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 28.</note> It was linked with the most spiritual forces of
Hellenic piety at Eleusis and Delphi;<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 35, addressed
to Clea, who was high in the
worship of Dionysus, and <q>hereditarily
devoted to Osiris.</q></note> it was transformed by
the subtle syncretism of later Greek philosophy; and, through
the secretaries of embassies, and the Egyptian slaves and
merchants who poured into the ports of southern Italy in the
second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, it stole or forced itself into the chapels of
great houses at Rome, till, in the end, emperors were proud to
receive its tonsure, to walk in the processions, and to build
and adorn Egyptian temples.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Com. Ant.</hi> c. 9; Spart.
<hi rend="italic">Sev.</hi> c. 17; Réville, <hi rend="italic">Rel. unter den Sev.</hi> p. 58.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Isiac worship had conquered the Greek world before it
became a power in Italy. In the fourth century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> traders
from the Nile had their temple of Isis at the Peiraeus;<note place="foot">Foucart, <hi rend="italic">Assoc. Religieuses</hi>, p. 83.</note> in the
third century the worship had been admitted within the walls
of Athens.<note place="foot">Lafaye, pp. 27-32; Paus. i. 18, § 4.</note> About the same time the goddess had found a
<pb n="561"/><anchor id="Pg561"/>home at Ceos, and Delos, at Smyrna and Halicarnassus, and
on the coasts of Thrace.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 38.</note> She was a familiar deity at
Orchomenus and Chaeronea for generations before Plutarch
found in her legends a congenial field for the exposition of
his concordat between philosophy and myth. Nor need we
wonder at his choice of the Egyptian cults. For the Isis and
Osiris of Greek and Italian lands were very different objects
of devotion from the gods who bore those names in Egyptian
legend.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 53,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὸ τῆς φύσεως θῆλυ</foreign>, c. 52,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὐχ ἑτέραν τῆς σελήνης</foreign>: c. 38,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὕτος Ἴσιδος σῶμα γῆν ἔχουσι καὶ νομίζουσιν, οὐ πάσαν,
    ἀλλ’ ἧς ὁ Νεῖλος ἐπιβαίνει σπερμαίνων</foreign>: cf. c. 32;
c. 56,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ὄσιριν ὡς ἀρχήν, τὴν δὲ Ἴσιν ὡς ὑποδοχήν, τὸν δὲ Ὥρον ὁς ἀποτέλεσμα</foreign>:
cf. Herodot. ii. 156; Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi.
c. 7, matrem siderum, parentem temporum,
orbisque totius dominam
blando mulcentes affamine.</note> From the seventh century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> Greeks from the
Asiatic coast had been securely settled at the mouth of the
Nile.<note place="foot">Herodot. ii. 154.</note> Greek mercenaries had served in the Egyptian armies
in the southern deserts; and Greek half-breeds had long
amused and cajoled travellers from Miletus or Halicarnassus,
as interpreters and guides to the scenes of immemorial interest.
When Herodotus visited the country, the identity of Greek
and Egyptian gods was a long accepted fact.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 156; cf. Plew, <hi rend="italic">De Sarapide</hi>,
p. 23 sqq.</note> From the fifth
century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> the Egyptian Trinity of Isis, Osiris, and Horus had
found counterparts in Demeter, Dionysus, and Apollo. The
campaign of the Athenian fleet in 460 probably hastened and
confirmed the process of syncretism,<note place="foot">Thuc. i. 104.</note> and crowds of travellers,
steeped in Orphic and Pythagorean mysticism, returned from
the valley of the Nile to spread the doctrine of a common
faith. After the foundation of Alexandria the theory became
a propaganda. The first Ptolemy strove to unite the two
races under his sway by an eclecticism of which Alexandria
was the focus for seven centuries. He found skilful allies
in Manetho, the Egyptian priest who had written a treatise
on the inner meaning of the myths, and in Timotheus, a
scion of the Eumolpidae of Eleusis.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 15 sqq.</note> The Orphic and Dionysiac
mysticism was leagued with the Isiac worship. The legend
of Egypt was recast. A new deity was introduced, who
was destined to have a great future in all lands under the
Roman sway. The origin of Serapis is still a mystery<note place="foot">Plew, <hi rend="italic">De Sarapide</hi>, p. 10 sqq.</note> and
the latest critic may have to acquiesce in the confused or
<pb n="562"/><anchor id="Pg562"/>balanced judgment of Tacitus.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 84.</note> Egyptian archaeologists
claimed him as indigenous at Rhacotis or Memphis, and
construed his name as a compound of Osiris and that of his
earthly incarnation, the bull Apis.<note place="foot">Plew, <hi rend="italic">De Sarapide</hi>, p. 15; Preller, p. 478.</note> The more popular tale
was that the first Ptolemy, after repeated visions of the night,
sent envoys to bring him from Sinope, where he was identified
with Pluto, god of the under world. Other traditions connected
him with Seleucia in Cappadocia, or with Babylon.<note place="foot">Plew, <hi rend="italic">De Sarapide</hi>, p. 6.</note>
It may be that a false etymology, confounding a hill near
Memphis with the name of Sinope, was the source of the tale
in Tacitus.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 17.</note> However this may be, Serapis takes the place of
Osiris; they never appear together in inscriptions. The infant
Horus received the Greek sounding name Harpocrates, and
Serapis, Isis, and Harpocrates became the Egyptian Trinity for
Graeco-Roman Society. Anubis, the minister of the Trinity,
was easily identified with Hermes, <q>the conductor of souls</q> in
Greek legend.
</p>

<p>
Syncretism and mysticism were great forces at Eleusis, from
which Ptolemy’s adviser Timotheus came. And there all
interest centred in the future life, and in preparation for it
by sacerdotal ritual and moral discipline. The Orphic and
Pythagorean mysticism which traced itself to Egypt or the
remoter East, returned to its sources, to aid in moulding the
cults of Egypt into a worship for the world. A crowd of
ingenious theologians set to work, by means of physical explanation,
wild etymology, and fanciful analogies, to complete
the syncretism. And the final results of their efforts, preserved
in the famous treatise of Plutarch on Isis, is a trinitarian
monotheism, with an original dualism of the good and evil
principles.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 45, 49.</note> But the idea of God, although limited in one
sense by the recognition of a co-ordinate evil power, tends on
the other to become more all-embracing. Serapis is constantly
linked with Jupiter and Sol Invictus in the inscriptions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1890 sqq.; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 1005; iii. 4560, 3.</note> In
the orations of Aristides he becomes the centre of the universe.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or. Sac.</hi> viii. 53,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ ταμίας ὢν τοῦ βιωσίμου κατὰ τοῦτ’ ἃν δικαίως ἅπαντα
περιειληφέναι νομίζοιτο ... ὁ δὲ ὥσπερ κορυφαῖος πάντων
ἀρχὰς καὶ πέρατα ἔχει</foreign>. Cf. Baumgar.
<hi rend="italic">Aristides als Repräsentant der Soph.
Rhet.</hi> p. 90 sqq.</note>
Isis of the <q>myriad names</q> tends to absorb all other deities,
<pb n="563"/><anchor id="Pg563"/>and was addressed by her votaries as <q>Thou who art all.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1871, tibi quae es omnia.</note>
The Isis of the dream of Lucius in Apuleius is the universal
mother, creator of all things, queen of the world of shades, first
of the inhabitants of heaven, in whom all gods have their
unchanging type.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. 7.</note> She is also pre-eminently the power who
can cleanse and comfort, and impart the hope of the life everlasting.
</p>

<p>
The Isiac worship arrived in Italy probably through the
ports of Campania. Puteoli, in particular, was the great
entrepôt for the trade with Alexandria. Foreign merchants,
sailors, and slaves were arriving there every day, and, in the century
between 204 and 100 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, more than ten embassies passed
between the Ptolemies and the Roman Senate, with a crowd of
secretaries and servants attached to them.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 43.</note> There was probably
a temple of Serapis at Puteoli as early as 150 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, and the
old temple of Isis at Pompeii, which was thrown down by the
earthquake of 63 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, may probably be referred to the year
105 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi><note place="foot">Id. p. 40; Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>, p. 163.</note> But the erection of temples must have been preceded
by a period of less formal and more obscure worship, and we
may perhaps conclude that Isis had established herself in
Southern Italy, at all events early in the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>
Thus, although it was generations before the worship won its
way, in the face of fierce persecution, to an assured place at
Rome, its first appearance coincides with the decay of the
old religion, the religious excitement in the beginning of the
second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, and the immense popular craving for a
more emotional form of worship.
</p>

<p>
The years at the end of the third and the beginning of
the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> were in Italy years of strange religious
excitement. In 204 the great goddess was brought from
Pessinus.<note place="foot">Liv. xxix. 10; Goehler, <hi rend="italic">De Matris Magnae Cultu</hi>, p. 7.</note> In 186 the decree for the suppression of the
Bacchanalian scandal was passed.<note place="foot">Liv. xxxix. 19.</note> Magna Graecia and Etruria
were the first points assailed by the invasion of the orgiastic
rites. But they soon crept into the capital, with results which
alarmed and shocked old Roman sentiment. At first, an
appearance of asceticism disguised the danger. But the
rites soon gave an opportunity for the wildest licence and for
<pb n="564"/><anchor id="Pg564"/>political intrigue. 7000 men and women were found to be
implicated, in one way or another, in the movement.<note place="foot">Preller, <hi rend="italic">Myth. Rom.</hi> p. 473.</note> Within
five years after the great scandal, the apocryphal books of
Numa were unearthed in the grounds of Cn. Terentius on the
Janiculum. The forgery was soon detected, and they were
burnt publicly in the Comitium by the praetor L. Petilius.<note place="foot">Plin. <hi rend="italic">H. N.</hi> xiii. 27; Liv. xl.
29; Momms. <hi rend="italic">Rom. Hist.</hi> ii. p. 402;
Lafaye, p. 41.</note>
But it was a suspicious circumstance that the rolls were of
Egyptian papyrus, which had been till then unknown to the
Roman world, and that they contained the dogmas of a
Pythagorean lore which was equally strange. It is almost
certain that, in the same years in which the Dionysiac fanaticism
arrived at Ostia, the Egyptian cults had been brought by
merchants and sailors to Puteoli. Osiris and Dionysus had
long been identified by the Alexandrian theologians; both were
the patrons of mystic rites which, in their form and essence,
had much in common, and the Pythagorean system, combining
so many influences of philosophy and religion in the East and
West, was the natural sponsor of the new worships. It
was perhaps some eclectic Alexandrian, half Platonist, half
Buddhist, devoted to the Isiac worship, yet ready to connect it
with the Dionysiac legends of Delphi, Cithaeron, and Eleusis,
who penned the secret scrolls, and buried them in the garden
on the Janiculum. The movement was setting in which, so
often repulsed by the force of government and conservative
feeling, was destined to have enormous influence over the last
three centuries of paganism in the West.
</p>

<p>
It has been plausibly suggested that the ease and completeness
with which the Bacchanalian movement was suppressed
in 186 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> was due to the diversion of religious interest to the
Egyptian mysteries. The cult of Isis had indeed very various
attractions for different minds. But for the masses, slaves,
freedmen, and poor working people, its great fascination lay in
the pomp of its ritual, and the passionate emotion aroused by
the mourning for the dead Osiris, and his joyful restoration.
It is this aspect of the worship which is assailed and ridiculed
by the Christian apologists of the reign of Alexander Severus
and of the reign of Constantine.<note place="foot">Tertull. <hi rend="italic">Adv. Marc.</hi> i. 13; Firm.
Mat. <hi rend="italic">De Err. Prof. Rel.</hi> 2, § 7, cur
plangitis fruges terrae et crescentia
lugetis semina?</note> The goddess, one of whose
<pb n="565"/><anchor id="Pg565"/>special functions was the care of mothers in childbirth, appealed
especially to female sensibility. As in the cult of Magna
Mater, women had a prominent place in her services and processions,
and records of these sacred dignities appear on the
monuments of great Roman ladies down to the end of the
Western Empire. The history of the Isiac cult at Rome from
Sulla to Nero is really the history of a great popular religious
movement in conflict with a reactionary conservatism, of
cosmopolitan feeling arrayed against old Roman sentiment.
</p>

<p>
It is significant of the popularity of Isis that the reactionary
Sulla, who restored the election of chief pontiff to the sacred
college, was forced to recognise the Isiac guild of the Pastophori
in 80 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi><note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 30, Collegii
vetustissimi et sub illis Sullae temporibus
conditi, etc.</note> Four times in the decade 58-48 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, the
fierce struggle was renewed between the government and those
who wished to place Isis beside the ancient gods; and in
the year 50 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi> the consul, when unable to find a workman
to lay hands upon her shrine, had to unrobe and use
the axe himself.<note place="foot">Tertull. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> 6; <hi rend="italic">Ad Nat.</hi> i. 10;
prohibitos Capitolio Varro commemorat
eorumque aras a senatu dejectas nonnisi
per vim popularium restructas,
Val. Max. i. 3, 4; cf. Lewald, <hi rend="italic">De Peregr.
Rel. ap. Rom.</hi> p. 10.</note> The victory of conservatism was only
temporary and apparent. Within five years from the renewed
fierce demolition of 48 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>,<note place="foot">D. Cass. xlii. 26.</note> the white robe and tonsure and the
mask of Anubis must have been a common sight in the streets,
when the aedile M. Volusius, one of those proscribed by the
triumvirs, was able to make his escape easily in this disguise.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 47; Val. Max. vii. 3, 8;
cf. App. <hi rend="italic">B. C.</hi> iv. 47.</note>
The influence of Cleopatra over Julius Caesar overcame his
own prejudices and probably hastened the triumph of the
popular cult. The triumvirs had to conciliate public feeling
by erecting a temple of Isis in 42 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi><note place="foot">D. Cass. xliii. 27; xlvii. 15.</note> Priestesses
and devotees of Isis are henceforth found among the freedwomen
of great houses and the mistresses of men of letters of
the Augustan age.<note place="foot">Catull. x. 26; Tibull. i. 3, 23;
Propert. ii. 33.</note> And, although the reaction following upon
the battle of Actium, in which the gods of Latium and the
Nile were arrayed against one another,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Aen.</hi> viii. 698.</note> banished Isis for a
time beyond the pomoerium,<note place="foot">D. Cass. liii. 2,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὰ μὲν ἱερὰ τὰ Αἰγύπτια οὐκ ἐσεδέξατο εἴσω τοῦ πωμηρίου</foreign>;
cf. liv. 6.</note> the devotion of the masses to
<pb n="566"/><anchor id="Pg566"/>her seems never to have slackened, and her tonsured, white
stoled priests were to be seen everywhere. In the reign
of Tiberius a serious blow fell on the Eastern worships.
According to Josephus, a great lady named Paulina, was, with
the collusion of the priest, seduced in an Isiac temple by a
libertine lover in the guise of Anubis, and the crime was
sternly punished by the emperor.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 55, discredits the tale
of the seduction, which is given by
Josephus alone, <hi rend="italic">B. Jud.</hi> xviii. 3; cf.
Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 85; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Tib.</hi> 36.</note> Tacitus and Suetonius
seem to be ignorant of this particular scandal, but they record
the wholesale banishment to Sardinia of persons of the freedmen
class, who were infected with Judaic or Egyptian
superstition. In the grotto of Cagliari there is to be seen the
record of an obscure romance and tragedy which may have
been connected with this persecution. Atilia Pomptilla, who
bore also the significant name of Benedicta, in some great
calamity had followed her husband Cassius Philippus into
exile. Their union had lasted for two-and-forty years
when the husband was stricken with disease in that deadly
climate. Like another Alcestis, Atilia by her vows and
devotion offered her life for his. The husband repaid the
debt in these inscriptions, and the pair lie united in death
under the sculptured serpent of the goddess whom they
probably worshipped.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x. 2, 7563 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thenceforth under the emperors Isis met with but little
opposition. Claudius struck hard at the Jewish and Druidic
rites, but on the other hand he was ready to transport those
of Eleusis to Rome.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Claud.</hi> 25; cf. D. Cass. lx. 6.</note> He was probably equally tolerant to
the rites of Egypt. And in his reign dedications were made to
Isis by freedmen of great consular houses.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 353.</note> Nero despised all
religions except that of the Syrian goddess; yet Isis had
probably little to fear from a prince who had been touched by
the charm and mystery of the East, and who at the last would
have accepted the prefecture of Egypt.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xv. 36; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Nero</hi>,
40, 47, varia agitavit, an vel Aegypti
praefecturam concedi sibi oraret, etc.</note> Otho was, however,
the first Roman emperor who openly took part in the Egyptian
rites.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, 12.</note> The Flavians had all come under the spell of Eastern
superstition. Vespasian had had a solitary vigil in the
<pb n="567"/><anchor id="Pg567"/>temple of Serapis; in obedience to a dream from the god he
had consented to perform miracles of healing.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> iv. v. vii.; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi>
iv. 81.</note> In the fierce
civil strife of 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, when the Capitol was stormed and burnt
by the Vitellians, the service of Isis was actually going on, and
Domitian, disguised in her sacred vestments, escaped among
the crowd of priests and acolytes.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iii. 74; cf. Suet. <hi rend="italic">Domit.</hi> i.</note> He repaid the debt by
rebuilding the temple of Isis in the Campus Martius, in 92
<hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, on a magnificent scale.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 61, n. 8.</note> The sarcasms of Juvenal on the
<q>shaven, linen-clad herd,</q> and the pious austerities of female
worshippers of Isis, reveal the powerful hold which the goddess
had obtained in his day, even on the frivolous and self-indulgent.
Hadrian, of course, had the gods of the Nile in the
Canopus of his cosmopolitan villa at Tibur.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Prom. <anchor id="corr567"/><corr sic="Archaeol.">Archæol.</corr></hi> p. 238;
Spart. <hi rend="italic">Hadr.</hi> c. 26.</note> Commodus walked
in procession with shaven head and an image of Anubis in his
arms.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Commod.</hi> 9.</note> The triumph of Isis in the Antonine age was complete.
</p>

<p>
The Serapeum at Alexandria was to the Egyptian cult what
the Temple was to the religion of Israel.<note place="foot">Gibbon, c. 28; Amm. Marc. xxii. 16.</note> And the world-wide
trade and far-spreading influence of what was then the
second city in the Empire might have given a wide diffusion
even to a religion less adapted to satisfy the spiritual wants of
the time. Slaves and freedmen were always the most ardent
adherents and apostles of foreign rites. Names of persons of
this class appear on many monuments as holders of Isiac
office or liberal benefactors. A little brotherhood of household
slaves at Valentia in Spain were united in the worship.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 6004.</note>
Petty traders from Alexandria swarmed in the ports of the
Mediterranean, and especially in those of Campania, and near
the Nolan gate of Pompeii the humble tombs of a little
colony of these emigrants have been discovered.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 157.</note> The sailors
and officers of the corn fleets from Africa also helped to spread
the fame of Isis and Osiris. In the reign of Septimius Severus,
their chief officer, C. Valerius Serenus, was neocorus of
Serapis.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 158.</note> Alexandria also sent forth a crowd of artists,
philosophers, and savants to the West. Several men of
Egyptian origin filled high places in the imperial household,
<pb n="568"/><anchor id="Pg568"/>as librarians or secretaries in the first and second centuries.
Chaeremon, who had been librarian at Alexandria, and who
had composed a theological treatise on Isis and Osiris, became
Nero’s tutor.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 157.</note> Chaeremon’s pupil, Dionysius, was librarian
and imperial secretary in the reign of Trajan. And Julius
Vestinus, who held these offices under Hadrian, is described
in an inscription as chief pontiff of Egypt and Alexandria,—a
combination of dignities which probably enabled him to
throw his powerful protection around the Isiac rites at
Rome.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.G.</hi> 5900,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ἀρχιερεῖ Ἀλεξανδρεῖας καὶ Αἰγύπτου πάσης καὶ ἐπιστάτῃ
τοῦ Μουσείου καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἐν Ῥώμῃ βιβλιοθηκῶν ...
ἐπιστολεῖ τοῦ αὐτοῦ αὐτοκράτορος</foreign>:
cf. Macé, <hi rend="italic">Suétone</hi>, pp. 92, 116.</note> An influence so securely seated on the Palatine was
sure to extend to the remotest parts of the Empire. If Isis
could defy all the force of the Republican Government, what
might she not do when emperors were enrolled in her priesthood,
and imperial ministers, in correspondence with every
prefecture from Britain to the Euphrates, were steeped in her
mystic lore?
</p>

<p>
Already in Nero’s reign, Lucan could speak of Isis and
Osiris as not only welcomed in the shrines of Rome, but as
deities of all the world.<note place="foot">Lucan, <hi rend="italic">Phars.</hi> viii. 831, nos in
templa tuam Romana accepimus Isin;
ix. 158, jam numen gentibus Isin.</note> Plutarch and Lucian, from very
different points of view, are witnesses to the same world-wide
movement. The judgment will be confirmed by even a
casual inspection of the religious records of the inscriptions.
Although Isis and Serapis were not peculiarly soldiers’ gods,
like Mithra and Bellona, yet they had many votaries among the
legions on distant frontiers. A legate of the Legion Tertia
Augusta, who was probably of Egyptian birth, introduced
the rites into the camp of Lambaesis, and a temple to Isis and
Serapis was built by the labour of many pious hands among his
soldiers.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2630; cf. Cagnat,
<hi rend="italic">L’Armée Rom. d’Afr.</hi> p. 423. See
other dedications by officers in <hi rend="italic">Or.
Henz.</hi> 5836, 7.</note> Serapis appears often on the African monuments,
sometimes leagued or identified with Jupiter or Pluto.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2629, 1002, 4, 5.</note> In
Dacia and Pannonia the cults of Egypt were probably not as
popular as that of Mithra, but they have left traces in all the
great centres of population.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> iii. 881, 2, 1428, 1590, 1342,
4015; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5838.</note> In several inscriptions<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 4809; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2035,
5833.</note> Isis is called
<pb n="569"/><anchor id="Pg569"/>by a native name such as Noreia, and we find on others the
instructive blending of the strata of four mythologies. Tacitus
thought he had discovered the counterpart of Isis in the forests of
Germany.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> 9.</note> She is certainly found in Holland, and at Cologne.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 1897.</note>
Officers of the sixth Legion worshipped her at York.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 5836.</note> French
antiquaries have followed the traces of the Egyptian gods in
nearly all the old places of importance in their own country,
at Fréjus, Nîmes, and Arles, at Lyons, Clermont, and Soissons.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 162. For an interesting
dedication for the support of the worship
at Nîmes <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3058.</note>
Shrines of Isis have been explored in Switzerland and at the
German spas.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 457; cf. Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 67,
in modum municipii exstructus locus,
amoeno salubrium aquarum usu frequens.</note> The scenes which were so common at Rome
or Pompeii or Corinth, the procession of shaven, white-robed
priests and acolytes, marching to the sound of chants and
barbaric music, with the sacred images and symbols of a worship
which had been cradled on the Nile ages before the time
of Romulus, and transmuted by the eclectic subtlety of Platonic
theologians into a cosmopolitan religion, were reproduced in
remote villages on the edge of the Sahara and the Atlantic,
in the valleys of the Alps or the Yorkshire dales.
</p>

<p>
What was the secret of this power and fascination in the
religion of a race whose cult of the dog and cat had so often
moved the ridicule of the satirist and comic poet? No single
answer can be given to that question. The great power of
Isis <q>of myriad names</q> was that, transfigured by Greek
influences, she appealed to many orders of intellect, and
satisfied many religious needs or fancies. To the philosopher
her legends furnished abundant material for the conciliation of
religion and pseudo-science, for the translation of myth into
ancient cosmic theory, or for the absorption of troublesome
mythologies into a system which perhaps tended more than
any other, except that of Mithra, to the Platonic idea of the
unity of God. The mystic who dreamt of an ecstasy of divine
communion, in which the limits of sense and personality might
be left behind in a vague rapture of imaginative emotion,
found in the spectacle of her inner shrine a strange power far
surpassing the most transporting effects of Eleusis. Women
especially saw in the divine mother and mourner a glorified
<pb n="570"/><anchor id="Pg570"/>type of their sex, in all its troubles and its tenderness, such as
their daughters in coming ages were destined to find in the
Virgin Mother.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 160; Réville, <hi rend="italic">Rel. unter
den Sev.</hi> p. 53; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> ii. 3386, Isis
puellaris.</note> The ascetic impulse, which has seldom been
far from the deepest religious feeling, derived comfort and
the sense of atonement in penitential abstinence and preparation
for the holy mysteries. The common mass, who are affected
chiefly by the externals of a religion, had their wants amply
gratified in the pomp and solemnity of morning sacrifice and
vespers, in those many-coloured processions, such as that which
bore in spring-time the sacred vessel to the shore, with the sound
of hymn and litany.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 11.</note> And in an age when men were everywhere
banding themselves together in clubs and colleges for
mutual help and comfort, the sacred guilds of Isis had
evidently an immense influence. That evil, as in nearly all
heathen worships, often lurked under her solemn forms cannot
be denied, though there was also groundless calumny.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 160, 1.</note> Yet
there must have been some strange power in a religion which
could for a moment lift a sensualist imagination like that of
Apuleius almost to the height and purity of Eckhart and
Tauler.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
The triumph of Isis and Serapis in the Western world is
an instructive episode in the history of religion. It is, like
that of Mithra, a curious example of the union of conservative
feeling with a purifying and transforming influence
of the growing moral sense. A religion has a double strength
and fascination which has a venerable past behind it. The
ancient symbolism may be the creation of an age of gross
conceptions of the Divine, it may be even grotesque and
repulsive, at first sight, to the more refined spiritual sense of
an advanced moral culture. Yet the religious instinct will
always strive to maintain its continuity with the past, however
it may transfigure the legacy of ruder ages. Just as Christian
theologians long found anticipations of the Gospel among
patriarchs and warrior kings of Israel, so pagan theologians
like Plutarch or Aristides could discover in the cults of Egypt
all their highest cosmic theories, and satisfaction for all their
spiritual wants.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 78; Aristid.
<hi rend="italic">Or. Sac.</hi> viii. 52, 53.</note> With unwavering faith, Plutarch and his
<pb n="571"/><anchor id="Pg571"/>kind believed that under all the coarse mythic fancy of early
ages there was veiled a profound insight into the secrets of
nature and the spiritual needs of humanity. The land of
the Nile, with its charm of immemorial antiquity, was long
believed to have been the cradle of all that was best and deepest
in the philosophic or religious thought of Hellas. The gods of
the classic pantheon were identified with the gods of Egypt.<note place="foot">Herodot. ii. c. 50.</note>
Pythagoras and the Orphic mystics had derived their inspiration
from the same source.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 81; Iambl. <hi rend="italic">De Pythag. Vit.</hi>
§ 151, cf. § 14; Porph. <hi rend="italic">Pythag.</hi> § 6;
Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 10.</note> The conquests of Alexander
and the foundation of Alexandria had drawn to a focus the
philosophical or the religious ideas of East and West, of India,
Palestine, Persia, and Greece. At Alexandria were blended
and transformed all the philosophies and mythologies by the
subtle dialectic of Greece. The animal cult of Egypt, indeed,
was always a stumbling-block to Greek and Roman.<note place="foot">Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apollon. Tyan.</hi> vi. 19;
D. Chrys. <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> xii. § 68.</note> It moved
the contempt and ridicule of comedian and satirist.<note place="foot">Juv. xv. 3; cf. Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Nat. Deor.</hi>
iii. 15; <hi rend="italic">Tuscul.</hi> v. 27.</note> It was
an easy mark for the sneers of the crowd. Yet even the
divinised dog or ibis could find skilful, if not convinced,
defenders among the Greek eclectics, who lent all the forces of
Hellenic ingenuity to the cause of antiquarianism in religion.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> cc. 72-74.</note>
Their native mythology was not without traces of zoolatry.
Their own god of healing, who became so popular in all lands,
was always connected in art and legend with the serpent. The
serpent of the Acropolis, which daily ate the holy wafer, was
the immemorial companion of the tutelary goddess of Athens.<note place="foot">Herodot. viii. c. 41.</note>
Had not Zeus, in his many amours, found an easy access to
the fair victims of his love in animal forms? The Divine
virtues are only faintly imaged in animals which have their
uses in the world. If all religion is only symbolism, why
should not the multiform beneficence of the unseen Powers
be expressed in the form of creatures who give their service
and companionship to man, as fitly as in lifeless bronze or
marble?
</p>

<p>
But although men might try to reconcile theology even
to a worship of animal forms, it was by very different spiritual
influences that Isis and Serapis won the devotion of the
<pb n="572"/><anchor id="Pg572"/>rustics of remote villages in Spain and Britain. The dog-headed
Anubis might perhaps be borne in processions.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 11, attollens canis
cervices arduas Anubis; cf. Juv. vi.
534; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. 44; Tertull.
<hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> 6; <hi rend="italic">Ad Nat.</hi> ii. 8.</note> The
forms of sacred animals might be portrayed, along with those of
Io and Andromeda, on the frescoes of Herculaneum or Pompeii.<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>, p. 175.</note>
But the monuments of the Western provinces are, as a rule,
singularly free from the grossness of early Egyptian zoolatry.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 106, 7.</note>
And there is hardly a hint of it in the famous picture of the
initiation of Lucius in the <hi rend="italic">Metamorphoses</hi> of Apuleius. In
that fascinating scene, Isis is the universal mother, Nature,
queen of the worlds of light and darkness, the eternal type
of all lesser divinities. And on inscriptions she appears as
the Power who <q>is all in all.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1871.</note> Whatever her special functions
may be, goddess of the spring, or of the sailor on the sea,
guardian of women in the pangs of motherhood, the <q>Queen
of peace,</q><note place="foot">On a Dacian inscription, <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
iii. 1590, Placidae Reginae.</note> guide and saviour of souls in the passage to the
world beyond the tomb, she remains the Supreme Power,
invoked by many names, with virtues and graces as various
as her names. And Serapis, in the later theology, is not the
president of any provincial territory in the universe. He is
not the lord of sea or earth or air only; he is lord of all the
elements, the dispenser of all good, the master of human life.
It is thus that Aristides hails him after his rescue from the
perils of the sea.<note place="foot">Baumgart, <hi rend="italic">Ael. Aristides Repräsent.
der Soph. Rhet. des zweit. Jahr.</hi>
p. 91; cf. Hadrian’s letter to Servianus,
Vopisc. <hi rend="italic">Vit. Saturn.</hi> c. 8.</note> But although Serapis in many a monument
is enthroned beside Jupiter, Queen Isis is also supreme in
the world both of the living and the dead.
</p>

<p>
Yet, although there is a very decided tendency to monotheism
in the Alexandrian religion, a tendency which appealed
strongly to minds like Plutarch, it did not succeed in altogether
breaking with polytheism and its attendant superstitions. The
attempted alliance of religion and philosophy was far from
complete. Philosophy, indeed, had substituted abstract theory
for the poetry of legend. It struggled hard to assert the
essential unity of the Divine nature. And Plutarch, in his
treatise on Isis, declares that God is one and the same in all
lands under whatever names He may be worshipped.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. 66, 79.</note> But the
<pb n="573"/><anchor id="Pg573"/>treatise shows at the same time how vague and unsettled still
was the theology of Alexandria, and how hard it found the task
of wedding Platonism to the haunting tradition of old idolatry.
Physics, metaphysics, etymology, are all employed with infinite
ingenuity to recover the secret meaning which it is assumed
that ancient wisdom had veiled under the forms of legend.
But arbitrary fancy plays far too large a part in these random
guesses, and system there is none, to bridge the gulf between
the Platonist eclectic and the superstitious masses. Isis
worship was in practice linked with all the reigning superstitions,
with divination, magic, astrology, oneiromancy.
Manetho, who was one of the founders of the worship of
Serapis, wrote a treatise for the Greek world on the influence
of the stars on human destiny.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 101.</note> Egyptian astrologists were
always in great demand. The emperors Otho and M. Aurelius
carried them in their train.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> i. 23; D. Cass. lxxi. 8,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ γάρ τοι λόγος ἔχει Ἀρνοῦφιν τινα μάγον Αἰγύπτιον
συνόντα τῷ Μάρκῳ κτλ.</foreign></note> Many Roman ladies in sickness
would not take food or medicine till the safe hour had been
determined by inspecting the Petosiris.<note place="foot">Juv. vi. 581.</note> The Isiac devotee
was an enthusiastic believer in dreams sent by his favourite
deities. On many inscriptions the record may be read of
these warnings of the night.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1882, ex visu; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 346,
572; v. 484.</note> In the syncretism of the time,
Serapis came to be identified with the Greek god of healing,
and patients sleeping in Egyptian temples received in dreams
inspired prescriptions for their maladies.<note place="foot">Cic. <hi rend="italic">De Div.</hi> i. 58, 132; Diod.
i. 25; Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or. Sacr.</hi> iii. p. 319
(Jebb).</note> Sometimes the deity
vouchsafed to confer miraculous powers of cure on a worshipper.
The sceptical good sense of Vespasian was persuaded by medical
courtiers at Alexandria to try the effect of his touch on the
blind and paralytic, who had a divine monition to seek the
aid of the emperor.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Hist.</hi> iv. 81, monitu Serapidis,
etc.</note> The cultivated Aristides had a firm
faith in these heaven-sent messages. He even believed that
Serapis could call back the dead to life.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 104; Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or. Sacr.</hi>
viii. 55.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet Aristides, in his prose hymn to Serapis, gives us a
glimpse of the better side of that religion. After all, the
superstitions which clustered round it were the universal
<pb n="574"/><anchor id="Pg574"/>beliefs of the age, prevalent among the most cultivated and
the most ignorant. The question for the modern student is
whether these Alexandrian worships provided real spiritual
sustenance for their devotees. And, in spite of many appearances
to the contrary, the impartial inquirer must come to
the conclusion that the cult of the Egyptian deities, through
its inner monotheism, its ideal of ascetic purity, its vision of a
great judgment and a life to come, was a real advance on
the popular religion of old Greece and Rome. Isis and Serapis,
along with Mithra, were preparing the Western world for
the religion which was to appease the long travail of humanity
by a more perfect vision of the Divine. It is impossible for a
modern man to realise the emotion which might be excited by
a symbolism like that of Demeter, or Mithra, or Isis, with
its roots in a gross heathen past. But no reader of Apuleius,
Plutarch, or Philostratus should fail to realise the surging
spiritual energy which, in the second and third centuries, was
seeking for expression and appeasement. It struck into
strange devious tracks, and often was deluded by phantasms of
old superstition glorified by a new spirit. But let us remember
the enduring strength of hereditary piety and ancient association,
and, under its influence, the magical skill of the religious
consciousness to maintain the link between widely severed
generations, by purifying the grossness of the past and
transforming things absurd and offensive into consecrated
vehicles of high spiritual sentiment. No one, who has read
in Apuleius the initiation of Lucius in the Isiac mysteries,
can doubt that the effect on the votary was profound and
elevating. Pious artistic skill was not wanting to heighten
emotion in Isis worship, as it is not disdained in our Christian
churches. But the prayer of thanksgiving offered by Lucius
might, <hi rend="italic">mutatis mutandis</hi>, be uttered by a new convert at a
camp-meeting, or a Breton peasant after her first communion.
It is the devout expression of the deep elementary religious
feelings of awe and gratitude, humility and joy, boundless
hope and trust. In the same tone, Aristides sings his prose
canticle to Serapis. There is not a memory of the brute
gods of the Nile. The Alexandrian god is now the equal or
counterpart of Zeus, the lord of life and death, who cares
for mortal men, who comforts, relieves, sustains. He is
<pb n="575"/><anchor id="Pg575"/>indeed a most awful power, yet one full of loving-kindness,
tenderness, and mercy.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or. Sacr.</hi> viii. 54,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">φιλανθρωπότατος γὰρ θεῶν καὶ φοβερώτατος αὐτός, κτλ.</foreign></note> In Plutarch we reach perhaps an even
more spiritual height. Osiris, who in old legend represented the
Nile, or the coarse fructifying powers of nature, passes into
the Eternal Love and Beauty, pure, passionless, remote from
any region of change or death, unapproachable in His ethereal
splendour, save, as in moments of inspired musing, we may
faintly touch Him as in a dream.
</p>

<p>
In the <hi rend="italic">Metamorphoses</hi> of Apuleius, the goddess who appears
in a vision to Lucius promises that, when his mortal course
is run, he shall find her illumining the Stygian gloom.
And, next to the maternal love with which she embraced her
votaries in this life, the great attraction of her cult was the
promise of a blessed future, through sacramental grace, which
she offered for the world to come. Serapis, too, is from the
beginning a god of the under world, a <q>guide of souls,</q> as
he is also their judge at the Great Assize.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> viii. 54,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">σωτὴρ αὐτὸς καὶ ψυχοπομπός, ἄγων εἰς φῶς καὶ πάλιν δεχόμενος κτλ.</foreign>; Plew, <hi rend="italic">De Sarapide</hi>,
p. 30.</note> The Orphic lore, the
mysteries of the Eleusinian goddesses and Dionysus, had for ages
taught a dim doctrine of immortality, under the veil of legend,
through the scenic effects of their dramatic mysteries. They
first revealed to the Greek race that the life to come was
the true life, for which the present was only a purgatorial
preparation. They taught, in whatever rude fashion, that
future beatitude could only be secured by a purification from
the stains of time.<note place="foot">Rohde, <hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. p. 126; cf. i. 286;
Lobeck, <hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> i. p. 239; Hardie, <hi rend="italic">Lectures
on Classical Subjects</hi>, pp. 56, 57.
The Orphici laid more stress on the
moral aspect of immortality than the
priests of Eleusis did.</note> The doctrine may have been drawn from
Egypt, and Egypt once more gave it fresh meaning and force.
The Alexandrian worship came with a deeper faith and more
impressive ritual, with dreams and monitory visions, with a
mystic lore, and the ascetic preparation for the holy mysteries,
with the final scene in the inner sanctuary, when the
votary seemed borne far beyond the limits of space and
time into ethereal distances.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 22.</note> The soul might, indeed,
have to pass through many bodies and mortal lives before
it reached the life eternal. But the motto of the Isiac faith,
inscribed on many tombs, was <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">εὐψύχει</foreign>, <q>be of good courage,</q>
<pb n="576"/><anchor id="Pg576"/><q>may Osiris give the water of refreshment.</q><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.G.</hi> 6562,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">δοίη σοι ὁ Ὄσιρις τὸ ψυχρὸν ὕδωρ</foreign>: cf. Plew, <hi rend="italic">De Sarap.</hi> p. 31.</note> Everywhere
the lotus, image of immortality, in its calix opening at
every dawn, appears on symbols of the worship. And Harpocrates,
the god who has triumphed over death, appears
as the child issuing from the mystic flower. The Roman
practice of burning the dead might seem to separate for ever
the fate of the body from the spirit, although it is really a
question of more or less rapid resolution of the mortal frame
into its original elements. But, as we have seen, the man of
the early Empire became more and more anxious to preserve
undisturbed the <q>handful of white dust</q> rescued from the pyre,
and would invoke the wrath of Isis against the desecrator.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 1879.</note> The
great object of many of the colleges was to secure their humble
members a niche in the <hi rend="italic">columbarium</hi>. The Alexandrine faith in
immortality, by the grace of Isis and Serapis, probably did not
inquire too curiously into the manner of the resurrection.
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly another secret of the popularity of the
Egyptian worships lay in their impressive ritual, the separation
of their clergy from the world, and in the comradeship of
the guilds in which their votaries were enrolled. Apuleius
has left us, in the initiation of Lucius at Cenchreae, and
again at Rome, a priceless picture of the Isiac ritual. Everything
in the ceremonial tends to kindle pious enthusiasm.
Sophocles and Pindar had extolled the blessedness of those
who had seen the mystic vision.<note place="foot">Pind. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> 137 (Christ); Soph. <hi rend="italic">Fr.</hi> 753—
<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 10"><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ὡς τρὶς ὄλβιοι</foreign></l>
<l><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">κεῖνοι βροτῶν οἳ ταῦτα δερχένθες τέλη</foreign></l>
<l><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">μόλωσ’ ἐς Ἅιδου.</foreign></l>
</lg>

Cf. <hi rend="italic">O.C.</hi> 1051.</note> The experience of Lucius
would seem to confirm the testimony of the Greek poets.
When the goddess has promised him deliverance from
brutish form, and pledged him to strict obedience, Lucius is
inspired with the utmost ardour to join in <q>the holy warfare.</q>
He takes up his abode in the sacred precincts, he begs to be
admitted to full communion. But the venerable pontiff
requires him to await the sign of the divine will. Lucius
continues in fasting and prayer till the sign at last comes;
when it comes he hastens to the morning sacrifice. The
scrolls, covered with symbols of ancient Egypt, are brought in,
and then, before a crowd of the faithful, he is plunged in the
sacred font. Returning to the temple, as he lies prostrate
<pb n="577"/><anchor id="Pg577"/>before the image of the goddess in prayer, he has whispered to
him <q>the unutterable words.</q> Ten days more are spent in
strictest retreat and abstinence from pleasures of the flesh;
and then came the crowning rite, the solemn vigil in the inner
sanctuary. There, as at Eleusis, a vivid drama of a divine
death and resurrection probably passed before his eyes, in
flashing radiance and awful visions, amid gloom and the
tones of weird music. But the tale of what he saw and heard
could never be fully unfolded to mortal ear.
</p>

<p>
There indeed are some sordid and suspicious traits in the
history of this worship. As in the case of the taurobolium,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 4321, ex stipe collata.</note>
the mysteries of Isis and Serapis could not be enjoyed without
a considerable outlay. And Lucius found a difficulty in meeting
the expense.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 28 (813), veste
ipsa mea quamvis parvula distracta
sufficientem corrasi summulum; cf.
Tertull. <hi rend="italic">Apol.</hi> 13.</note> But, whether in heathendom or Christendom,
a regular priesthood and an elaborate ritual cannot be
supported without the offerings of the faithful. There has
probably never been a religion in which the charge of venality
has not been levelled against the priests. But Lucius finds
here no stumbling-block. No material offering can repay the
goodness and love of the goddess. He feels towards her not
only reverence and gratitude, but the love of a son to a
Divine mother. Ascetic isolation has produced the natural
result of imaginative ecstasy and mystic exaltation. The long,
quiet hours of rapt devotion before the sacred figure in the
stillness of the shrine, the spectral visions of the supreme
hour of revelation, made a profound impression on a soul
which was deeply tainted by other visions of old-world sin.
</p>

<p>
The daily ritual of Isis, which seems to have been as
regular and complicated as that of the Catholic Church, produced
an immense effect on the Roman mind. Every day
there were two solemn offices, at which white-robed, tonsured
priests, with acolytes and assistants of every degree, officiated.<note place="foot">Tibull. i. 3, 31, bisque die, resoluta
comas, tibi dicere laudes Insignis
turba debeat in Pharia.</note>
The morning litany and sacrifice was an impressive service.
The crowd of worshippers thronged the space before the chapel
at the early dawn. The priest, ascending by a hidden stair,
drew apart the veil of the sanctuary,<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 20 (795), velis
candentibus reductis.</note> and offered the holy image
<pb n="578"/><anchor id="Pg578"/>to their adoration. He then made the round of the altars,
reciting the litany, and sprinkling the holy water <q>from the
secret spring.</q> At two o’clock in the afternoon the passers by
could hear from the temple in the Campus Martius the chant
of vespers.<note place="foot">Mart. x. 48, 1, nunciat octavam
Phariae sua turba juvencae.</note> A fresco of Herculaneum gives us a picture of the
service. It is the adoration of the holy water, representing
in symbol the fructifying and deathless power of Osiris. A
priest, standing before the holy place, raises breast high a
sacred urn for the adoration of the crowd. The sacrifice is
smoking on the altar, and two choirs are chanting to the
accompaniment of the seistron and the flute.<note place="foot">Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>, pp. 171, 172.</note> Another fresco
from Herculaneum exhibits a bearded, dark-skinned figure,
crowned with the lotus, in the attitude of dancing before a
throng of spectators to the sound of music. It is plausibly
conjectured that we have here a pantomimic representation of
the passion of Osiris and its joyful close.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 115; <hi rend="italic">Catal.</hi> No. 222.</note> There was much
solemn pomp and striking scenic effect in this public ceremonial.
But it is clear from Apuleius, that an important part of
worship was also long silent meditation before the image of
the goddess. The poets speak of devotees seated thus before
the altar, and in the temple at Pompeii a bench has been
found which, from its position, was probably occupied by such
silent worshippers.<note place="foot">Mau, p. 171; Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 17
(791), intuitans deae specimen pristinos
casus meos recordabar; Mart. ii. 14, 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
The great festivals of the Egyptian worship were the
blessing of the sacred vessel on the fifth of March, and the
celebration of the quest and finding of Osiris in November.
The anniversary of the death and rising again of the god was
strictly observed by large numbers, especially among women.
Pagan and Christian writers have alike ridiculed the theatrical
grief and joy for a god so often found, so often lost.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 126; Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi>
c. 39,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">διὸ μηνὸς Ἀθὺρ ἀφανισθῆναι τὸν Ὄσιριν λέγουσιν,
    <anchor id="corr578"/><corr sic="κτλ">κτλ.</corr></foreign>: Juv. viii. 29;
vi. 534; Ov. <hi rend="italic">Metam.</hi> ix. 692, nunquamque
satis quaesitus Osiris; Lucan, viii.
831, et quem tu plangens hominem
testaris Osirim; Min. Fel. c. 21.</note> The
death of Osiris at the hands of Typhon, the rending of the
divine form, and the dispersion of the lacerated remains, were
passionately lamented in sympathy with the mourning Isis.
With effusive grief the devotees beat their breasts and lacerated
their arms, and followed in eager search. When on the
<pb n="579"/><anchor id="Pg579"/>third day the god had been found and restored, the joyful
event was hailed with extravagant gladness, and celebrated
by a banquet of the initiated. For some of these holy
days the rubrics prescribed a long preparation of fasting and
ascetic restraint. But that a general strictness of life was not
required of the Isiac votary, at least under the early Empire,
may be inferred from the fact that the frail Cynthias and
Delias in Propertius and Tibullus were among the most regular
in ritual observance.<note place="foot">Ov. <hi rend="italic">Am.</hi> i. 8, 74; iii. 9, 30; Prop.
ii. 33, 3; Tibull. i. 3, 23.</note> The festival of the holy vessel of Isis,
which marked the opening of navigation, and received the
benediction of the goddess, was, in the early Empire, observed
with solemn pomp and enthusiasm by the coast towns of the
Mediterranean. A brilliantly vivid description of such a
scene at Cenchreae has been left by Apuleius. It was a
great popular carnival, in which a long procession, masquerading
in the most fantastic and various costumes, conducted the
sacred ship to the shore. Women in white robes scattered
flowers and perfumes along the way. A throng of both
sexes bore torches and tapers, to symbolise the reign of
the Mother of the stars. The music of flute and pipe
meanwhile filled the air with sacred symphonies, and a
band of youths in snow-white vestments chanted a hymn.
Wave upon wave came the throng of those who had been
admitted to full communion, all clad in linen, and the men
marked with the tonsure. They were followed by the priests,
each bearing some symbol of the many powers and virtues
of the goddess, the boat-shaped lamp, the <q>altars of succour,</q>
the palm of gold, the wand of Mercury. In a pix were
borne the holy mysteries, and, last of all, the most venerable
symbol, a small urn of shining gold and adorned in
subtle workmanship with figures of Egyptian legend.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 11 (774-78);
Réville, <hi rend="italic">Rel. unter den Sev.</hi> p. 56.</note> This
holy vase, containing the water of the sacred river, which was
an emanation from Osiris,<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 38,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Νεῖλον Ὀσίριδος ἀπορροὴν ... ἔχουσιν</foreign>.</note> closed the procession. Arrived at
the margin of the sea, the chief priest consecrated the sacred
vessel with solemn form and litany, and named it with the holy
name. Adorned with gold and citrus wood and pictures of
old legend, it spread its white sails to the breeze, and bore
<pb n="580"/><anchor id="Pg580"/>into the distance the vows and offerings of the faithful for the
safety of those upon the deep.
</p>

<p>
The oriental religions of the imperial period were distinguished
from the native religion of Latium by the possession
of a numerous and highly organised priesthood, and an
intensely sacerdotal spirit.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 54; Lafaye, p. 130 sqq.</note> In an age of growing religious
faith, this characteristic gave them enormous power. The
priest became a necessary medium of intercourse with God.
It is also one of the many traits in the later paganism,
which prepared and softened the transition to the reign of
the mediaeval Church. It would be tedious and unprofitable
to enumerate the various grades of the Isiac priesthood.
There were high priests of conspicuous dignity, who were
also called <hi rend="italic">prophetae</hi>.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.G.</hi> 6006; Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> ii. c. 28
(159), propheta primarius, xi. c. 17
(788), sacerdos maximus. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
2305, C. Ruf. Volusianus pater ierofanta
profata Isidos; 1878, 6666; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> x.
6445; xii. 410.</note> But ordinary priests could perform
many of their functions.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 133.</note> There were interpreters of
dreams, dressers and keepers of the sacred wardrobe of the
goddess,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xii. 3061, Ornatrix fani Nemausi.</note> whose duties must have been onerous, if we may
judge from the list of robes and jewels and sacred furniture
preserved in inscriptions or recovered from the ruins of Isiac
shrines.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 135.</note> It has been remarked that the roaming Visigoths
in southern Gaul must have had a rare spoil if they had the
fortune to light on one of the great temples of Isis. The
scribe of the Pastophori, in Apuleius, is also an important
officer. He summons the sacred convocation, and recites the
<q>bidding prayer</q> for the Emperor and all subjects, in their
several places and stations.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 17 (789).</note> Music took a large part in the
ritual; there was hymn-singing to the sound of flutes, harp,
and cymbal; and the chanters and paeanists of Serapis
formed an order by themselves.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> c. 9 (772), dicati Serapi tibicines.</note> The prayer which Lucius
offers to the goddess, in Apuleius, has been arranged as a
metrical litany.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 138, n. 4.</note> Women often appear in inscriptions and in
our texts as priestesses, and had a prominent place in all
solemn ritual.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2355, 6385, 2309.</note> And it is evident that, with all its sacerdotalism,
the worship gave full recognition to devout wor<pb n="581"/><anchor id="Pg581"/>shippers of every degree and sex. All who are devoted to
the service have their place and function. The initiated might
even wear the tonsure in the ordinary lay life. To do this,
indeed, needed some courage, in the face of Roman ridicule.
But the religious were, from the earliest times in Greece and
Italy, associated for mutual support in sacred guilds, designated
by various names, Isiaci or Pastophori or Anubiaci.
In the third century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, such societies are found in Ceos
and Peiraeus.<note place="foot">Foucart, <hi rend="italic">Assoc. Religieuses</hi>, p. 117;
<hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> 66, 240.</note> On the walls of Pompeii they have left their
appeals to the electors to vote on behalf of candidates for
the aedileship.<note place="foot">Mau, p. 478, Cn. Helv. Sabinum
aed. Isiaci rogant.</note> They were organised on the usual lines of
the ancient colleges, divided into decuries, with a director and
a treasurer, a <q>father</q> or a <q>mother,</q> or a patron at their
head.<note place="foot">Foucart, pp. 25-30; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
6029, 2313, mater sacrorum; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
vi. 2277; <hi rend="italic">Or.</hi> 2308, patrono Sacr.
Isidis; Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 30 (817).</note> The Isiac guilds must have had a powerful influence
in the diffusion of the religion of Alexandria. But they
also were probably one cause of the suspicion so long entertained
for that worship by the Republican government, and
they only asserted their full strength in the second century,
when the colleges in general received the tacit sanction of the
emperors. That the emperors felt little fear of these foreign
sacred corporations became clear when an emperor actually
took the tonsure of Isis.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Commod.</hi> c. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Isiac system was energetic and self-assertive, but it
can hardly be called dangerous or revolutionary. It threw
many of the old gods into the shade, but its syncretism also
found a place for many of them. Its inner monotheism, after
the fashion of those days, had open arms of charity for all the
ancient gods. One of the priests of Isis might be called
Iacchagogus or Mithra;<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 22 (800).</note> statues of Dionysus and Venus and
Priapus stood in the court of the Isium at Pompeii.<note place="foot">Lafaye, pp. 189, 190; Mau, p. 169.</note> The
Isis of Apuleius proclaims her identity with nearly all the
great powers of classical legend, and gathers them into herself.
But Isis identifies only to conquer and absorb. And her
priesthood formed an aggressive and powerful caste. The
sacerdotal colleges of the Latin religion were never, except in
<pb n="582"/><anchor id="Pg582"/>the case of the Vestals, separated from ordinary life. The
highest pontificate was held by busy laymen, by consuls or
emperors or great soldiers. After the performance of his part
in some great rite, the Roman priest returned to his civic
place and duties. And in Greece, in the third and second
centuries <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, even the Isiac priesthood was held only for a
year, or even for a month; and the sacred processions at
one time needed the authorisation of the local council at
Samos.<note place="foot">Lafaye, p. 149.</note> But when we come to the days of Apuleius, all
this is changed. The chief priest at Cenchreae is evidently
a great ecclesiastic, bearing the sacred Eastern name of
Mithra.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 22 (800), Mithram
illum suum sacerdotem praecipuum,
divino quodam stellarum consortio ut
aiebat mihi conjunctum, sacrorum
ministrum decernit.</note> He has given up ordinary civic life, and has
probably abandoned his Greek name to take a new name
<q>in religion.</q> Every day two solemn services at least
have to be performed in the temple, besides the private
direction of souls, which had evidently become a regular
part of the priestly functions. Attached to the great
temples, and close to the altar, there is a <q>clergy house</q>
where the ministers are lodged. It is called the Pastophorion,
and its chambers have been traced in the débris
of the temple at Pompeii.<note place="foot">Lafaye, pp. 151, 186; Mau, <hi rend="italic">Pompeii</hi>,
p. 174.</note> One of these presbyteries was
the scene of the seduction which convulsed the religious
world in the reign of Tiberius, and which sent so many pious
exiles to the solitudes of Sardinia. The ministers of Isis and
Serapis are marked off by the tonsure and the Isiac habit,
which meet us in the pages of poets from Tibullus to Juvenal,<note place="foot">Tibull. i. 3, 30; Mart. xii. 29;
Juv. vi. 526; Suet. <hi rend="italic">Otho</hi>, 12.</note>
and in the frescoes of Pompeii and Herculaneum. The
abstinence, which was required as a preparation for communion
in ordinary votaries, was a lifelong obligation on the priest.
The use of woollen garments, of wine, pork, fish, and certain
vegetables, was absolutely forbidden to them.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is.</hi> c. 4, 8, 32.</note> Chastity was
essential in the celebrant of the holy mysteries, and even
Tertullian holds up the priests of Isis as a reproachful example
of continence to professing followers of Christ. The priesthood
is no longer a secondary concern; it absorbs a man’s
<pb n="583"/><anchor id="Pg583"/>whole life, sets him apart within the sanctuary as the dispenser
of sacred privileges, with the awful power of revealing the
mystery of eternity, and preparing souls to meet the great
ordeal.
</p>

<p>
It does not need much imagination to understand the
fascination of Isis and Serapis for a people who had outgrown
a severe and sober, but an uninspiring faith. They came to
the West at the crisis of a great spiritual and political
revolution, with the charm of foreign mystery and the
immemorial antiquity of a land whose annals ran back to
ages long before Rome and Athens were even villages. But
with antique charm, the religion combined the moral and
spiritual ideas of generations which had outgrown the gross
symbolism of Nature worship. The annual festivals might
preserve the memory of the myth, which in its grossness and
brutal tragedy once pictured the fructifying influence of the
mysterious river on the lands which awaited his visitations,
or the waning force of vegetative power and solar warmth.
But Serapis, the new god of the Ptolemies, became the lord of
life and death, the guide and saviour of souls, the great judge
of all in the other world, an awful power, yet more inclined to
mercy than to judgment.<note place="foot">Aristid. <hi rend="italic">Or. Sacr.</hi> xiii. p. 54.</note> And Isis rose to equally boundless
sway, and one of greater tenderness. Powers above and powers
below alike wait on her will: she treads Tartarus under her
feet, and yet she embraces all, and specially the weak and
miserable, in the arms of her charity.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 24.</note> Above all, she has the
secret of the unseen world, and can lighten for her worshipper
the Stygian gloom. But the Isiac, like the Orphic revelation,
while it gave a blessed promise for the life to come, attached
grave conditions to the pledge. In this brief time of probation,
the soul must prepare itself under ghostly guidance for
the great trial. Sacrament and mystery lent their aid to
fortify the worshipper in the face of death, but, to derive their
full virtue, he must exercise himself in temperance, abjure the
pleasures of the senses, and purify himself for the vision of
God.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi></note> The sacred ritual of the Egyptian might captivate the
senses and imagination by its pomp and music, its steaming
altars, and many-coloured symbolism. But in the stillness of
the sanctuary the worshipper was trained to find his moments
<pb n="584"/><anchor id="Pg584"/>of purest and most exalted devotion in silent meditation
before the Queen of heaven and the shades. The <anchor id="corr584"/><corr sic="lonely">lonely,</corr>
the weak, and the desolate found in the holy guilds succour
and consolation, with a place in the ritual of her solemn
seasons, which bound each to each in the love of a Divine
Mother.
</p>

</div><div type="chapter" n="6" rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="585"/><anchor id="Pg585"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VI. The religion of Mithra"/><index index="pdf" level1="VI. The religion of Mithra"/>
<head>CHAPTER VI</head>

<head type="sub">THE RELIGION OF MITHRA</head>

<p>
Of all the oriental religions which attracted the devotion of
the West in the last three centuries of the Empire, that of
Mithra was the most powerful. It is also the system which
for various reasons has the greatest interest for the modern
student. It is perhaps the highest and most striking example
of the last efforts of paganism to reconcile itself to the great
moral and spiritual movement which was setting steadily, and
with growing momentum, towards purer conceptions of God, of
man’s relations to Him, and of the life to come. It is also the
greatest effort of syncretism to absorb, without extinguishing,
the gods of the classic pantheon in a cult which was almost
monotheistic, to transform old forms of nature worship and
cosmic symbolism into a system which should provide at once
some form of moral discipline and real satisfaction for spiritual
wants. In this effort, Mithraism was not so much impeded
by a heritage of coarse legend as the worships of Pessinus
and Alexandria. It was indeed sprung from the same order
of religious thought as they. It could never detach itself
from its source as a cult of the powers of nature.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Monuments Relatifs aux Mystères de Mithra</hi>, Intr. pp. 309, 310.</note> But the
worship of the Sun, with which Mithra was inseparably connected,
was the purest and most natural form of devotion,
if elemental powers were to be worshipped at all. And heathendom
tended more and more under the Empire to fix its
devotion on the source of all light and life. The Sun was to
Plato the highest material symbol of the Infinite Good. Neo-Pythagoreanism
and Neo-Platonism regarded him as the sacred
<pb n="586"/><anchor id="Pg586"/>image of the power beyond human ken.<note place="foot">Zeller, <hi rend="italic">Phil. der Griech.</hi> iii. 2, p.
101; cf. Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 17; Philostr.
<hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> ii. 38; vi. 10, § 1; M.
Aurel. xi. 27.</note> <q>Before religion,</q>
it has been said, <q>had reached the point of proclaiming that
God must be sought in the realm of the ideal and the absolute
outside the world of sense, the one rational and scientific cult
was that of the Sun.</q><note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 336; Dieterich,
<hi rend="italic">Eine Mithrasliturgie</hi>, p. 197.</note> Heliolatry also harmonised with
absolutism in the State, as the old Persian kings and their
imitators, the emperors of the third century, clearly perceived.
The great temple of the Sun, which Aurelian, the son of a
priestess of the deity, founded in the Campus Martius, with its
high pontiffs and stately ritual, did honour not only to the
great lord of the heavenly spheres, but to the monarch who
was the august image of his power upon earth and who was
endued with his special grace.<note place="foot">Flav. Vop. <hi rend="italic">Aurelian</hi>, c. 36, 39.</note> The power of Mithra in the
fourth century lay in the fact that, while it was tender and
tolerant to the old national worships, and never broke with the
inner spirit of heathenism, it created an all-embracing system
which rose above all national barriers, which satisfied the
philosophic thought of the age in its mysticism, and gave
comfort and a hope of immortality through its sacraments.
</p>

<p>
Mithra was one of the most ancient and venerable objects
of pagan devotion, as he was one of the last to be dethroned.
In faint outline he can be traced to the cradle of the Aryan
race.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 223 sq.; Gasquet,
<hi rend="italic">Le Culte de Mithra</hi>, p. 16 sq.</note> In the Vedas he is a god of light, and, as the god of
truth, who hates all falsehood, he has the germ of that moral
character which grew into a great force in the last age of his
worship in the West. In the Avestas, the sacred books of the
religion of Iran, which, however late their redaction, still enshrine
a very ancient creed, Mithra has the same well-defined
personality. He is the radiant god who seems to emerge
from the rocky summits of eastern mountains at dawn, who
careers through heaven with a team of four white horses; yet
he is not sun or moon or any star, but a spirit of light, ever
wakeful, watching with a thousand eyes, whom nothing can
escape and nothing deceive.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 225.</note> And so, while he gives warmth
and increase to the earth, and health and wealth to men, he is
also from the beginning a moral power. He confers wisdom
<pb n="587"/><anchor id="Pg587"/>and honour and a clear conscience and concord. He wages a
truceless war with the evil powers of darkness, and guards his
faithful soldiers against the craft of the enemy. He is the
friend and consoler of the poor; he is the mediator between
earth and heaven; he is the lord of the world to come.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 20.</note> But
his place in the Zoroastrian hierarchy was not always equally
high. At one time he was only one of the <hi rend="italic">yazatas</hi>, who were
created by the supreme Ormuzd.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 226 sqq.</note> But Mithra has still the
attributes of guardian and saviour; he is approached with
sacrifice, libation, ablution, and litany, as in the latest days of
his power in the West. And again a higher place is given to
him; he is the vicegerent of the remote, ineffable Ormuzd, the
mediator through whom the supreme power crushes evil
demons, and wages war with Ahriman; he is invoked in the
same prayers side by side with the Supreme. The Great
Kings, especially the later, regard Mithra as their special
guardian, swear by him in their most solemn oaths,<note place="foot">Xen. <hi rend="italic">Cyrop.</hi> vii. 5, 53; <hi rend="italic">Oecon.</hi> iv.
§ 24.</note> and call
upon him in the hour of battle. If he was the god of the
humble and afflicted, he was also the god of the prince and
warrior noble, and so we shall find him at the end.
</p>

<p>
The Persian conquest of Babylon had lasting effects on
the religion of Mithra. There he encountered a sacerdotal
system which had its roots in an immemorial civilisation. The
conquerors, as so often happens, were to some extent subdued
by the vanquished.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 231; Gasquet, p.
21 sqq.</note> Syncretism set in; the deities of the
two races were reconciled and identified. The magical arts
and the astrolatry of the valley of the Euphrates imposed
themselves on the purer Mazdean faith, and never relaxed
their hold, although they failed to check its development as a
moral system. Ormuzd was confounded with Bel, Mithra
with Shamash or the Sun-god. The astral and solar lore,
the faith in mystic numbers, which had been cultivated in
Babylonia through many generations, took its place in the
theology of Mithra, and they have left their mark in many a
chapel on the Danube and the Rhine. Yet Mithra, identified
with the Sun at Babylon, was never absorbed in the cult
of the solar deity in the West.<note place="foot">Donsbach, <hi rend="italic">Die räumliche Verbreitung
des <anchor id="corr587"/><corr sic="Mithrasdientes">Mithrasdienstes</corr></hi>, p. 5.</note> On many of the later
<pb n="588"/><anchor id="Pg588"/>inscriptions Mithra and the Sun are mentioned side by side as
equals and allies. Yet the connection of Mithra with Babylon
is never forgotten either by Greeks or Romans. Claudian
connects him with the mysteries of Bel.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Laud. Stilich.</hi> i. 62.</note> The priest who,
with many weird rites, in a waste sunless spot beside the
Tigris, conducts Menippus to the underworld, wears the dress
of Media, and bears the name Mithrobarzanes.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Menippus</hi>, cc. 6-9.</note>
</p>

<p>
With the destruction of the Persian empire and the diffusion
of Magian influence in Asia Minor, the worship arrived at its
last stage before entering on the conquest of the West.
The monarchs of Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, and Commagene,
who claimed descent from the Achaemenids, were
politic or enthusiastic votaries of the religious traditions of
Iran.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 232.</note> While they reverenced Ormuzd and Anaitis, Mithra
was their special patron, as he was to Artaxerxes.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Inscr. Orient.</hi> i. 2, 3.</note> Mithra’s
name appears constantly in the names of royal houses, such as
Mithradates and Mithrobarzanes. The inscription on the tomb
of Antiochus of Commagene, who boasted of his descent from
Darius the son of Hystaspes, records the endowment of solemn
Persian rites, and combines the names of Ormuzd and Zeus, of
Apollo and Mithra.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Inscr. Grecques</hi>, i.</note> In the submergence of national barriers
which followed the fall of the Persian monarchy, and under
the influence of Greek philosophy, that process of syncretism
began in Asia Minor which was destined to produce such
momentous results in the third and fourth centuries. But the
Mazdean faith, strong in its associations with the ancient
sources of spiritual enlightenment in the East, never succumbed
to the western paganism. The classical gods might be admitted
to the Mazdean heaven; Zeus might be confounded with
Ormuzd; Anaitis might find an analogue in Artemis Tauropolus.
But the ancient name of Mithra was never profaned
in the liturgy by any translation.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 236.</note> It was chiefly perhaps in
Phrygia and Lydia that alien worships produced a lasting
effect in modifying the Persian theology. The pure morality
of the Mithraist creed might seem to have little in common
with the orgies of the devotees of Attis and the Great Mother.
But religious sentiment has a miraculous power both to
<pb n="589"/><anchor id="Pg589"/>reject and to transmute. The costume and Phrygian cap of
Attis appear on all the monuments of Mithra to the end.
And, although it is a subject of debate, the taurobolium, that
baptism of blood which was the most impressive rite of the
later paganism, was, in all probability, early borrowed by
Mithra from the ritual of Phrygia.<note place="foot">Gasquet, pp. 31 and 75; Réville,
<hi rend="italic">Rel. unter den Sev.</hi> p. 93; Goehler,
<hi rend="italic">De Matris Mag. Cultu</hi>, p. 55; but cf.
Cumont, Intr. pp. 334-5.</note> The pine, the emblem of
immortality, which is so prominent in the scenes of mourning
for Attis,<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 31.</note> also has a place in the sculptured remains of the
Persian chapels. And the title Menotyrannus, a title of Attis,
which is given to the Persian god on many slabs, recalls his
passage through the same region.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 508, 511; cf. Cumont,
Intr. p. 235.</note> But Greek art had a more
powerful and enduring effect on the future of Mithra than
any of these accretions. Probably the ancient Persian faith
recoiled from any material image of its divine powers,<note place="foot">Strab. xv. 3, § 13 (732),
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Πέρσαι τοίνυν ἀγάλματα μὲν καὶ βωμοὺς οὐχ ἱδρύονται ...
τιμῶσι δὲ καὶ Ἥλιον ὃν καλοῦσι Μίθραν, κτλ.</foreign></note> although
here also Assyria may have corrupted its purity. But when
Hellenic imagination began to play around the Mazdean gods,
the result was certain. The victorious Mithra was clothed
with human form, and his legend was fixed for ever by some
nameless Pergamene artist, who drew his inspiration from the
<q>steer-slaying Victory</q> of Athens.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. pp. 181, 237.</note> The group in which the
youthful hero, his mantle blown back by the wind, with a
Phrygian cap upon his head, kneels on the shoulder of the
bull, as he buries his poniard in its throat, was for four
centuries reproduced in countless chapels from the mouth of
the Danube to the Solway. That symbolic scene, conveying
so many meanings in its hieratic rigidity, became to the pious
Mithraist what the image of the Divine Figure on the Cross
has been for so many centuries to the devout Catholic.
</p>

<p>
The revelation of the spread of Mithra worship in the
Roman Empire is one of the greatest triumphs of modern
archaeology. Only faint notices of the cult are found in
Herodotus, Xenophon, and Strabo.<note place="foot">Herod. i. 131; Xen. <hi rend="italic">Cyrop.</hi> vii.
5, 53; Strab. <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi></note> Quintus Curtius knew the
Persian god as the soldier’s special patron, inspiring courage
in battle.<note place="foot">Q. Curt. iv. 13, § 48.</note> From the verses in the <hi rend="italic">Thebaid</hi> of Statius we
<pb n="590"/><anchor id="Pg590"/>may conclude that he knew something of the service in Mithra’s
grottoes, and that he had seen the figure of the <q>bull slaying</q>
god.<note place="foot">Stat. <hi rend="italic">Theb.</hi> i. 717; cf. Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Textes</hi>, p. 47.</note> Plutarch knows Mithra as the mediator between Ormuzd
and Ahriman.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 46.</note> Lucian had probably seen the rites in his
native Samosata; he knew the figure with the candys and
tiara, and, from the sneer at the god’s ignorance of Greek, he
may perhaps have heard the old Mazdean litany.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Deor. Concil.</hi> c. 9; <hi rend="italic">Menippus</hi>,
c. 6 sqq.; <hi rend="italic">Jup. Trag.</hi> c. 8.</note> But he had
probably little notion of the hold which Mithra had already
obtained on the farthest regions of the West. Still less had
he any prevision of his great destiny in the third and fourth
centuries. Literature, down to the Antonine age, teaches us
little of the character and strength of the worship. Without
votive inscriptions and the many ruins of his chapels, along
with the indignant, yet anxious, invective of the Christian
apologists, we should never have known how near the Persian
god came to justifying his title of the <q>Unconquered.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to fix the precise date when the worship
of Mithra first crossed the Aegean. The silence of inscriptions
must not indeed be taken as proving that he had no devotees
in Italy before the Flavian age. A famous passage in
Plutarch’s life of Pompey would seem to refer the first
appearance of the worship in the West to the conquest of the
pirates of Cilicia by Pompey, in 70 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi><note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Pomp.</hi> c. 24.</note> A religion of the
alien and the slave may well have been long domiciled in
Italy before it attracted general notice. And there may have
been humble worshippers of Mithra at Rome or Puteoli even in
the days of Julius Caesar. The Mithraist inscription of the
time of Tiberius is now admitted to be a forgery.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5844.</note> But from
his reign may probably be dated the first serious inroads of the
cult. Under Tiberius, Cappadocia was incorporated in the
Empire, and Pontus under Nero; Commagene, the home of
Jupiter Dolichenus, who was a firm ally of Mithra, was
finally absorbed in the reign of Vespasian.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 243, n. 3; Tac.
<hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> ii. 42; D. Cass. lvii. 17; Suet.
<hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> c. 8.</note> The official
organisation of these districts, and the constant intercourse
established between central Asia Minor and the capital, must
have opened many channels for the importation of new forms
<pb n="591"/><anchor id="Pg591"/>of devotion from the East. Almost in the very year in which
Statius was penning his verses about Mithra in the <hi rend="italic">Thebaid</hi>, a
freedman of the Flavian house erected a tablet to the god on
the Esquiline,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 732. On the date of the
<hi rend="italic">Thebaid</hi>, cf. Teuffel, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Lit.</hi> § 316, n. 3.</note> and soldiers of the East carried his mysteries to
the camps on the Danube. The 15th Legion, which had
fought under Corbulo against the Parthians, and taken part
in the conquest of Palestine in 70 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, in the first years of
the reign of Vespasian, established the worship of Mithra at
Carnuntum in Pannonia, which became henceforth the sacred
city of Mithra in the West.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 253; cf. Tac.
<hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> xiii. 35.</note> In 102 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> a marble group
was dedicated by the slave of a praetorian prefect of Trajan.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 718, <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 102.</note>
It is probable that at Ostia we have records of the cult from
the year 162.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 265, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> No.
133.</note> The Mithraeum, found under the church of
S. Clement at Rome, has yielded an inscription of the last
years of Antoninus Pius. That emperor erected a temple to
Mithra at Ostia.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 81.</note> Rome and Ostia were probably the
earliest points in Italy invaded by the Persian worship.
All the conditions were favourable to an early and rapid
propagation of the cult in the capital of the world.
Soldiers from the East would be serving in the garrison,
or settled after their release from service. Eastern slaves
swarmed in all the great houses, including that of the emperor.
A large proportion of the dedications are made by men of
servile origin, and the very name of the dedicator would often
be enough to indicate his nationality. More than 100 inscriptions,
more than 75 pieces of Mithraist sculpture, with the
ruins of many chapels of the god, attest his powerful influence
at Rome.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 274, n. 6.</note> Ostia which, since the reconstruction of Trajan, had
overshadowed Puteoli, was hospitable to all alien rites.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 275; Donsbach, pp. 15-17.</note> The
port had at least four temples of Mithra in the second century,
and it is significant of the alliance between the two worships,
that a Mithraeum there was built close to a shrine of the
Great Mother,<note place="foot">Cumont, p. 265, n. 4; cf. p. 333.</note> and that members of the college of the Dendrophori
sometimes made offerings and dedications to Mithra.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi>; <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 510; <hi rend="italic">Or.
Henz.</hi> 6040.</note>
<pb n="592"/><anchor id="Pg592"/>The remains at Ostia disclose some other indications of the
prevailing syncretism. The Roman Sylvanus has a niche in
one Mithraeum, and, in another, Saturn and Jupiter, Mars,
Mercury and Venus, are figured beside the purely Eastern
symbols of the planets and the signs of the zodiac.<note place="foot">Donsbach, p. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
The inner secret of that rapid propaganda we shall never
fully know. But we can discover with tolerable certainty the
kind of people who carried the gospel of Mithra to the most
remote parts of the western world. The soldiers were his most
zealous missionaries.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 246 sq.</note> Drafted from Cappadocia or Commagene,
and quartered, far from his home, in a camp on the Danube or
in the Black Forest, the legionary clung to the worship of his
native East, and was eager to admit his comrades to fellowship
in its rites. The appearance of Mithraism in certain places can
be traced directly to the quartering of a legion which had been
recruited from the countries which were the original home of
the worship. Officers of eastern birth on promotion passed into
other corps, and extended the influence of the East.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 258, n. 8; cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 5855,
1916, 1917, 1922.</note> Centurions
retiring from active service became apostles of the movement
in the places where they settled. Syrian merchants, who were
still found at Orleans in the time of the Merovingians, with all
the fanaticism of their race popularised their native worships
in the ports of Italy, Gaul, along the coasts of the Adriatic,
and among the centres of commerce on the Danube or the
Rhine.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 263.</note> The civil servants of the emperor, clerks and commissaries
of every degree, procurators and agents of great
estates, who were often men of servile origin, have left many
traces of their zeal in spreading the Persian worship both
throughout Italy and in countries north of the Alps.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 3960, 4797, 5620, 4802;
vi. 721.</note> The
slave class probably did as much for the glory of Mithra as
any other.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 265.</note> It was largely drawn from Cappadocia, Pontus,
and Phrygia, those regions where the religion of Mithra had
taken deep root before it passed into Europe. And, like the
Christian, the religion of Mithra was, at the outset of its
career, a religion of the poor and humble. It was only in
the second century that it achieved the conquest of the court
and the educated classes. It was probably through slaves that
<pb n="593"/><anchor id="Pg593"/>it found its way into remote corners of Apulia, Lucania, or
Etruria.<note place="foot">Cf. Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> 150, sagaris actor;
cf. the list of the Cultores Mithrae,
<hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> xi. 5737.</note>
</p>

<p>
The stages in the spread of the Mithraist rites throughout
Italy cannot be clearly traced. But in the second century the
cult was established not only in Campania, Capreae, and Ischia,
but in lonely country places in Southern Italy.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p 268; Donsbach,
p. 19.</note> It had
spread to a circle of towns around Rome—Lanuvium, Alba,
Velitrae, Labici, and Praeneste.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 268.</note> Borne by traders, imperial
officers or slaves, it followed the line of the great roads to
the north. Thus we can trace its march along the Via Cassia
through Etruria, at Volsinii, Arretium, and Florence.<note place="foot">Donsbach, p. 19.</note> It
arrived at Pisa probably by sea. Along the Flaminian Way, it
may be followed through Interamna, Spoletium, and Sentinum
to Bononia. At Nersae, in the Aequian territory, the cult must
have been of some antiquity in 172 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi><note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L</hi> ix. 4109, 4110.</note> For, in that year
the treasurer of the town, a man probably of the slave class,
restored a chapel which had fallen into ruins. The roll of
the patrons of a Mithraist society at Sentinum has come
down to us, with the names of slaves or freedmen among its
members.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> xi. 5737.</note> In Gallia Cisalpina the traces of Mithra are less
frequent. Milan, already growing to its great destiny in the
fourth century, and Aquileia, are the chief seats of the Persian
cult. Aquileia has yielded a large number of inscriptions.
From its situation at the mouth of the Po, as the great
<hi rend="italic">entrepôt</hi> for the trade between the Adriatic and the Danubian
provinces, it must have powerfully stimulated the diffusion of
the worship.<note place="foot">Donsbach, p. 20; Cumont, Intr.
p. 266.</note> It is curious, however, that the passes of the
Alps have yielded richer booty to the investigator in this field
than the plains of Lombardy. In the mountain valleys leading
to Rhaetia and Noricum, as well as in those above the
Italian lakes, many relics of this far-spreading religion have been
given to the light.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 269.</note> A temple of Mithra has been discovered
near Trent, in the valley of the Adige. In the Tyrol and
Carinthia sacred grottoes, buried among woods and rocks, have
disclosed bas-reliefs, sculptured with the traditionary figures of
<pb n="594"/><anchor id="Pg594"/>Persian legend. They were probably frequented by the faithful
down to the reign of Valentinian.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 237, 239; <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi>
408.</note> Throughout Noricum and
Pannonia imperial functionaries or agents of private enterprise,
procurators, clerks of the treasury, custom-house officers, or
eastern freedmen and slaves, have left many traces of their
devotion to the Persian god.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 3480, 3479, 4796, 4797,
5121.</note> Thus, everywhere along the
great roads which radiated from Aquileia to the markets or
strong places upon the Danube, the votary of Mithra would
find in the days of the Antonines many a shrine, stately or
humble, where he could refresh his piety by the way.
</p>

<p>
The Greek provinces have yielded but few memorials of the
worship of Mithra. But, from the mouth of the Danube to
the north of England his triumphant march can be traced, with
only a break here and there. He follows the line of the rivers
or the great roads, through the frontier camps or the centres
of Roman commerce. Firmly seated at Tomi and the ports of
the Black Sea, Mithra has not left many traces, so far as
exploration has gone, in Thrace and Macedonia.<note place="foot">Donsbach, p. 21.</note> Nor have the
Moesias as yet contributed many monuments, although at
Troesmis and Oescus, along the great military road, bas-reliefs
and inscriptions have been brought to light.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 249; Donsbach,
p. 22.</note> Next to Pannonia
and the territory of the Upper Rhine, Dacia was the province
where Mithraism seems to have reached its greatest popularity
in Europe.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 250.</note> In the year 107, after six desolating and often
doubtful campaigns, Dacia was resettled and organised by
Trajan.<note place="foot">Eutrop. viii. 6.</note> Its depopulated fields were colonised with immense
masses of men from all parts of the Roman world. Probably
there has seldom been such a <hi rend="italic">colluvies gentium</hi> assembled.
And, among these alien settlers, there were many from Edessa,
Palmyra, and those regions of the East where Mithra or his
kindred deities had their earliest and most fervent worshippers.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 247, n. 6.</note>
In the capital of the province, Sarmizegetusa, an excavated
Mithraeum has afforded fifty bas-reliefs and inscriptions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 251, n. 3.</note>
The colony of Apulum can show the remains of at least four
temples. And Potaissa and other places, with names strange
to English ears, have enriched the museums.
</p>

<pb n="595"/><anchor id="Pg595"/>

<p>
Pannonia abounds with interesting remains of Mithra, not
only in the great seats of Roman power on the Danube, but in
places far in the interior.  And in this province can be
distinctly traced not only the progress of the military propaganda,
but the dates, with approximate accuracy, when the
mysteries of Mithra were first introduced.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. pp. 252, 3.</note> Aquincum and
Carnuntum were the chief seats of the Persian worship on
the Danube. In the former town, the god had at least five
chapels in the third century. There were at least four in the
territory of Carnuntum, one of them being closely connected
with that of the allied deity, Jupiter Dolichenus of Commagene.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> No. 228; Intr. p. 253.</note>
The original votaries of the reign of Vespasian had
been contented with a rude grotto, partially formed by the
configuration of the rocks, the intervals being filled in with
masonry.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> No. 225; Intr. p. 253.</note> This structure in the third century was replaced
by a more stately edifice at the expense of a Roman knight.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> No. 368.</note>
There can be little doubt that the spread of Mithraism in
Pannonia was chiefly the work of two Legions, the II. Adjutrix
and XV. Apollinaris, both largely recruited from Commagene
or Cappadocia.<note place="foot">Mommsen, <hi rend="italic">Rom. Prov.</hi> ii. p. 63, n.</note> The bricks of a Mithraeum at Carnuntum
bear the stamp of the 15th Legion, and the inscriptions
contain several dedications by soldiers of the two corps.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 4418, 4416; Donsbach,
p. 25.</note> The
15th Legion, which was quartered on the Danube in 71 or 72,
had fought under Corbulo against the Parthians, and had
borne a part in suppressing the Jewish revolt of 70 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> We
may be sure that the gaps in its ranks were filled by eastern
recruits.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 13, 35, habiti per
Galatiam Cappadociamque dilectus.</note> The soldiers of other corps, such as the Legions
XIII and XIV, Geminae Martiae, caught the religious enthusiasm,
and took part in the erection of buildings and in monumental
offerings.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> No. 225.</note> It was probably through officers, transferred from
the Danube, that the worship was introduced into the camp of
Lambaesis in Numidia. There is a tablet of the third century to
Mithra in that camp, dedicated by a prefect of the 3rd Legion,
who was born at Carnuntum.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> viii. 2675; Cagnat, p. 189.</note> In Noricum and Rhaetia, the
military propaganda seems to have been less vigorous than in
<pb n="596"/><anchor id="Pg596"/>Pannonia. But a corner of the former province was once
guarded by a corps from Commagene, which has left traces of
its presence in the name of a town on the Danube and in
some monuments to Mithra.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> iii. 5650; Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi>
No. 416; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> No. 238; cf. Donsbach,
p. 26.</note> In Rhaetia his remains are
singularly scanty.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 255; Donsbach,
 p. 27.</note> But when we come to the <hi rend="italic">Agri Decumates</hi>
and the region of the Upper Rhine, we find ourselves in a
district once more teeming with relics of Mithra. Not only has
this region given to the light the largest number of his chapels,<note place="foot">For the number and the sites <hi rend="italic">v.</hi>
Donsbach, p. 27.</note>
but the bas-reliefs found in their ruins surpass all others in
their dimensions and the completeness of their symbolism.
The tauroctonus group of Osterburken is regarded as the
masterpiece of Mithraist art in its complex variety and the
vivid and masterly skill of the execution.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> No. 351.</note> Many of the
German inscriptions to Mithra are offered by simple citizens.
But, from the number dedicated by soldiers also, Cumont may
be right in tracing the diffusion of the worship once more to
military zeal. It is true, the legions quartered in Germany
did not contain any considerable number of recruits from the
East. But they were in constant communication with the
camps upon the Danube, where oriental influences were strong.
It is significant that the earliest inscription to Mithra yet
found in Germany, of the year <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi> 148, is that of a centurion
of the 8th Legion, which was quartered in Moesia from
47 till 69, and which during that time had frequent communications
with the East. The legion was in 70 removed
from Moesia to Upper Germany.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> No. 423; Intr. p. 256,
n. 2.</note> It is probable that, however
it was introduced, the worship of Mithra may have found its
way into the valley of the Neckar, and even to the Lower
Rhine, before the end of the first century. Coins of Trajan
have been found in the temple at Friedberg;<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> No. 248 (p. 359).</note> a series of coins
from Vespasian to M. Aurelius has been recovered from a
temple in the neighbourhood of Cologne.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> No. 265 (p. 388).</note> From Cologne the
line of conquest may be followed to Boulogne, the station of
the British fleet. Thence the cult passed easily to London,
which, in the time of Tacitus, was a centre of great commercial
<pb n="597"/><anchor id="Pg597"/>activity.<note place="foot">Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> 14, 33, Londinium ...
copia negotiatorum maxime celebre.</note> The legions probably carried the worship to the
great camps of Caerleon, Chester and York. At all the guardposts
of the great rampart of Hadrian, there were chapels of
the eastern god, and the inscriptions show that the officers at
this remote outpost of the Empire maintained a warm devotion
to the religion of their native East.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> Nos. 471-490;
Donsbach, p. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
The regions of the western world on which Mithra, from
whatever causes, seems to have made least impression were
Western Gaul, Spain, and North Africa.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 259 n.</note> Syrian merchants,
slaves, or soldiers, had established the worship at Lyons, Arles,
and Narbonne. But Elusa is the only place in Aquitaine
where traces of it have been found. In Spain, the legionaries
carried it only to a few remote frontier posts in Asturia or
Gallicia.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 260; Donsbach, p. 30.</note> The African garrisons, recruited largely from the
surrounding country, remained true to their native deities, and
the few inscriptions to Mithra at great military strongholds,
like Lambesi, are probably due to the devotion of some of the
higher officers, who had been transferred to these distant
quarters from Syria or the Danube.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi>; cf. Cagnat, <hi rend="italic">L’Arm.
rom. d’Afr.</hi> p. 353, on the history and
composition of the Legio III. Augusta.</note>
</p>

<p>
If we try to explain the fascination of this religion of
central Asia for western minds, we must seek it partly in
its theological system, partly in its ritual and clerical organisation,
still more in its clear promise of a life beyond the grave.
In these characteristics, Mithraism differed profoundly from
Graeco-Roman paganism, and seemed, in the eyes of the
Christian apologists, to be a deceptive imitation of the rites
and doctrines of the Christian Church. Inspired with the
tendency or ambition to gather many races into its fold,
Mithraism was a compound of the influences of very different
ages, and offered many footholds for the faith or superstition
of the lands which it traversed in its march. It drew, from
points widely severed in time and place, doctrine or symbolism
or rite, from the ancient lands of the Aryan race, from the
mountain homes of the Persians, from Babylon and Phrygia
and Commagene, from the philosophy of Greece, and the
mythologies of all the peoples among whom it came. Yet it
<pb n="598"/><anchor id="Pg598"/>never to the end ceased to be a Persian cult. In the Divine
Comedy of Lucian, as it may be called, Mithra, even when he
is admitted to Olympus, cannot speak in Greek.<note place="foot">Luc. <hi rend="italic">Deor. Concil.</hi> c. 9.</note> His name
is never disguised or translated. On many of his inscriptions
the names of the old Mazdean pantheon, such as Ahriman, the
power of evil, still figure.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 87.</note> The mystic beasts which are always
present in the sacred scene of the tauroctonus, the lion, the
dog, the snake, the scorpion, had all a hieratic meaning in
Persian theology.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 190; Gasquet,
p. 70.</note> The cave, which was the immemorial
sanctuary of the worship, amid all the mystic meanings attached
to it by later Neo-Platonist speculation, carried the mind
back to Zoroastrian symbolism.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 56;   Gasquet,
p. 36.</note> The <hi rend="italic">petra genetrix</hi>, which
is figured on so many sacred slabs on the Danube and in
Upper Germany, goes back to the very cradle of the worship.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> 441, 444; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi>
213, 245, 252.</note>
The young god, emerging from the spires of rock, round which
a serpent coils itself, is the first radiance of the upspringing
sun, as on high, lonely peaks it flashes and broadens to
the dawn. The great elemental powers, sun and moon,
ocean, the winds and seasons, are generally grouped around
the central piece, in forms borrowed from classic art.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 251 (p. 365); Intr. p. 92;
cf. Herod. i. 131.</note> Fire
and water are always present; no chapel was without its
fountain.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 246 (p. 348).</note> And the tradition of the astral lore of the
Euphrates can be seen in the signs of the zodiac which
encompass the sacred scene of mystic sacrifice in the chapels
on the Upper Rhine.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 109; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 246, 247,
248, 251, 273.</note> The very letters of the name of
Mithra, expanded into Meithras, according to S. Jerome, like
the mystic word Abraxas, yielded to ingenious calculation
the exact number of days in the year.<note place="foot">Donsbach, p. 6; Gasquet, p. 24;
Dieterich, <hi rend="italic">Mithrasliturgie</hi>, p. 146;
S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Com. in Amos</hi>, v. 9, 10.</note> It is difficult for us
to conceive how these frigid astronomical fancies should form
a part in a religious system which undoubtedly from the
beginning had a profound moral effect on its adherents. Yet
it is well to remember that there was a time when the mystery
of the stellar spaces, and the grandeur and beneficence of the
sun, were the most awful and impressive things in human
<pb n="599"/><anchor id="Pg599"/>experience. The cold scrutiny of the telescope has long since
robbed the heavenly orbs of their mystic power over human
destiny. Yet even now, a man who has not been imbued
with the influence of modern science, may, on some calm,
starlit summer night, travel back in imagination to the dreams
of the early star-gazers on the Ganges or the Euphrates, and
fancy that, in the far solitary splendour and ordered movement
of those eternal fires, which shine so serene and pitiless on this
small point in the universe, there may be forces to guide or
signs to predict the course of mortal destiny. Nor was it an
altogether unworthy dream, which floated before the minds
of so many generations, that in those liquid depths of space,
where, in the infinite distance, the radiance of widely-severed
constellations blends into a luminous haze, might be the eternal
abode of spirits who, after their sojourn in the flesh, have
purged themselves of earthly taint.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 15, § 10
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The relative influence of Babylon and ancient Iran in
moulding the theology of Mithraism, has long been a subject
of controversy. The opposing schools, represented by Lajard
and Windischmann,<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. pp. 71, 72.</note> have been discredited or reconciled by
saner methods of criticism, and wider archaeological knowledge.
It is now seen that while Babylonia has left a deep impress
on the creed of Mithra, yet the original Aryan or Persian
elements still maintained their ascendency. Mithra, in his long
journey, came under many influences; and he absorbed many
alien ideas from the cults and art of the many lands through
which he travelled. His tolerance, indeed, was one great
secret of his power. But, while he absorbed, he assimilated
and transmuted. He remained the god of Persia, while he
gathered into his creed mystic elements that might appease the
spiritual cravings of the western world.<note place="foot">Cf. Dieterich, <hi rend="italic">Mithrasliturgie</hi>, pp.
150, 165, 202; Cumont, Intr. pp. 331,
336.</note> His system came to
represent the best theological expression of the long movement
of pagan mysticism, which, beginning with the mythic names
of Orpheus and Pythagoras, organised in the classic mysteries,
elevated and glorified by the genius of Plato, ended, if it has
ended, in the Neo-Platonic movement which offered a last
resistance to the Christian church. The central ideas of that
<pb n="600"/><anchor id="Pg600"/>theory of life and death were presented to the neophyte in the
mysteries of Mithra, and one of the last expounders of the
Platonic creed, in the reign of Theodosius, had probably
been initiated in one of the last chapels of the worship.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 104; cf. Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som.
Scip.</hi> i. 12; Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 17; cf.
Lobeck, <hi rend="italic">Aglaoph.</hi> ii. 933; Rohde,
<hi rend="italic">Psyche</hi>, ii. pp. 121, 402.</note> In
that vision of human destiny, of the descent and ascent
of the human soul, the old Orphic doctrine is united with the
star-lore of the Euphrates. Travelling towards its future
prison-house in the flesh, the spirit which leaves the presence
of Ormuzd descends by the gate of Cancer, through the
spheres of the seven planets, and in each acquires a new
faculty appropriate to its earthly state. The Mithraist
discipline and sacraments prepare it for the ascent after death.
When the soul at last leaves its mortal prison, it has to submit
to a great judgment in the presence of Mithra, and if it pass
the ordeal, it may then return through the seven spheres, at
each stage divesting itself of those passions or earthly powers,
which it had taken on for a time in its downward journey.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. pp. 308, 309; cf.
Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 12.</note>
Finally, through the remote gate of Capricorn, its sublimated
essence will pass back again to ecstatic union with the
Supreme. It is thus that the East and West, Orphic mysteries
and Chaldaean astrology, combined to satisfy the craving for a
moral faith and the vision of another world.
</p>

<p>
The religion of Mithra probably achieved its highest
victory through an ethical theology, typified and made
concrete to the average worshipper by an elaborate symbolism
in rite and sculptured scene. But it had also a cosmic
theology. Mithra, in virtue of his moral power, became in
the end the central figure. But in nearly all his chapels can
be discovered a divine hierarchy, in which, for ages, he did
not hold the foremost rank. The highest place is given to
Infinite Time, without sex or passions, or properly without
even a name, although in order to bring him within the
vulgar ken, he may be called Cronus or Saturn and imaged in
stone as a lion, wrapped in the coils of a snake.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 294; <hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> p. 75.
But cf. Gasquet, p. 41.</note> He is the
author of life and death; he carries the keys of heaven, and
in his limitless sway, he is identified with the unbending
power of Fate. Like other cosmic systems of the East
<pb n="601"/><anchor id="Pg601"/>the Mazdean explained the universe by a succession of
emanations from the Infinite First Cause.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 295.</note> From his own
essence, Cronus engendered Earth and Heaven, whom mythologers
may call Jupiter and Juno, and they in turn give
life to Ocean. Jupiter, as in classical mythology, succeeded
to the power of Cronus, and gave to the world the Olympian
deities, along with Fortune, Themis, and the Fates. In the
hemisphere of gloom and evil, another order was engendered
by Infinite Time, which is represented by Ahriman, or, in the
fancy of more western lands, by Pluto and Hecate. The evil
spirits, who are their progeny, like the Titans of Greek legend,
have tried to storm Olympus, and been hurled back to the
under world.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 296.</note> There they still retain their power to plague and
corrupt the race of men; but, by means of incantation, and
sacrifice, their malice may be turned aside. In this daemonology
Mithraism joined hands with the new Platonism, of which
Plutarch, as we have seen, was one of the earliest apostles, and
the affinity between them continued to the last age of paganism.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 301.</note>
But it was in its divinisation of the elemental powers and
heavenly bodies that this religion probably obtained its most
powerful hold on an age profoundly fatalist and superstitious.
The strife of the four elements figures under animal symbolism
on innumerable sculptures of the chapels of Mithra, around
the image of the bull-slaying God.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 251 (p. 365).</note> The divine fire which
sparkles in the stars, and diffuses the warmth of life in animal
or plant, blazed perpetually on the altar of the crypt.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 297.</note> The
sun and moon are seldom missing from these slabs. In the
great masterpiece of Mithraic art at Osterburken, the two
deities occupy opposite corners of the tablet.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 246 (p. 349).</note> The sun-god,
with a cloak floating from his right shoulder, is urging his four-horse
team up the steep of heaven, and over the car floats
Phosphorus, as a naked boy, bearing a torch in each hand.
On the opposite side, Selene, crowned with the crescent and
erect in her car, is urging her team of oxen downwards towards
the gloom. On another piece, also found in the heart of
Germany, there is an impressive scene, in which Mithra and
the Sun, arrayed in eastern costume, stand side by side over a
<pb n="602"/><anchor id="Pg602"/>huge slaughtered bull. The sun god is handing to Mithra a
bunch of grapes, which he receives with a gesture of admiration.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 251 (p. 365).</note>
</p>

<p>
The most popular, and the least wholesome, element, which
Mithraism borrowed from Babylon, was the belief in planetary
influence. The seven planets became the arbiters of human
destiny, and their number acquired a hieratic significance.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 300; Gasquet, p.
62.</note>
The days of the week and the seven principal metals were
consecrated to them. The various grades of initiation into the
mysteries of Mithra found a correspondence in the intervals of
the seven spheres.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 316; cf. Gasquet,
pp. 94, 95.</note> The soul, in descending to its earthly
tenement for a season, passes through their successive realms,
and assumes appropriate faculties in each, just as, on its
release and ascension, it divests itself of them, one by one,
as it returns to the region of ethereal purity. But the
astral doctrine, introduced into the system of Iran from
Chaldaea, was a dangerous addition to the creed. It was
a fatal heritage from ages of benumbing superstition, and,
while it gave an immense impetus to the progress of the solar
cult, it counterbalanced, and, to some extent, neutralised its
more spiritual and salutary doctrines.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 301.</note> A co-ordinate evil
power, side by side with the beneficent Creator and Preserver,
and his revealer and mediator, a host of daemons, tempting to
sin, as well as visiting men with calamity, an iron Fate at the
centre of the Universe, whose inevitable decrees are at once
indicated and executed by the position and motions of the
planets—all this gloomy doctrine lay like a nightmare on the
human mind for many ages, and gave birth to all sorts of evil
arts to discover or avert or direct the pitiless forces which
controlled the fate of man. This is the dark side of Mithra
worship, and, in this evil tradition from Babylon, which
partially overlaid the purer creed of Persia, we may find some
explanation of the strange blending of dark superstition with
moral earnestness which characterised the reaction of Julian,
the votary of the Sun, and the patron of Maximus.
</p>

<p>
But, although the deification of the great elemental powers
and the mingled charm and terror of astrology gave the
religion of Mithra a powerful hold on the West, there were
<pb n="603"/><anchor id="Pg603"/>other and nobler elements in his system which cannot escape
the candid enquirer. The old unmoral, external paganism no
longer satisfied the spiritual wants of all men in the second
century. It is true the day will probably never come when
the religion of many will not begin and end in solemn, stately
rite, consecrated to the imagination by ancient use, and
captivating the sense by scrupulously ordered ceremonial.
The ritualist and the puritan conception of worship will
probably always exist side by side, for they represent two
opposite conceptions of religion which can never entirely blend.
And certainly in the days of M. Aurelius the placid satisfaction
in a sumptuous sacrifice, at which every word of the ancient
litany was rendered to the letter, was still profoundly felt by
many, even by the philosophic emperor himself. But there
were other ideas in the air. Men heard from wandering
preachers that God required other offerings than the <q>blood of
bulls and the ashes of a heifer,</q> that the true worship was in
the sacrifice of a purified spirit.<note place="foot">Cf. Denis, <hi rend="italic">Idées Morales</hi>, etc. ii. p.
248 sq.; cf. Burgmann, <hi rend="italic">Seneca’s Theologie</hi>,
p. 37; Sen. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 95, 50; 31,
§ 11; Philostr. <hi rend="italic">Apoll. Tyan.</hi> v. 25;
Max. Tyr. <hi rend="italic">Diss.</hi> viii.; xiv. § 7, 8;
xvi. § 9.</note> Platonist and Pythagorean,
even when they might reverently handle the ancient symbolism
of ritual, were teaching that communion with the Infinite
Father was only possible to a soul emancipated from the
tyranny of sense. Moreover, as we have seen, the new
Platonism was striving to create some mediatorial power between
the world of sense and the Infinite Spirit, transcending all old
materialistic fancies of the Divine.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> supra, <ref target="Pg426">p. 426</ref>.</note> This Platonic daemonology,
indeed, from the Christian point of view, was a very crude and
imperfect attempt to bridge the gulf. And it had the graver
fault that it was really a revival of the old mythology. Yet
it was also an attempted reformation. It was an effort to
introduce a moral influence into paganism. It was an effort
to substitute for physical and naturalistic conceptions a moral
theory of the government of the world. That was surely an
immense advance in religious history, and foreshadowed the
great revolution which was to launch the western world on a
new spiritual career. The hosts of sister spirits, whom
Maximus of Tyre imagines as surrounding and sustaining the
life of men, involved in the darkness and sorrow of time, are
<pb n="604"/><anchor id="Pg604"/>a conception strange to the old paganism. And the need of
mediatorial sympathy, of a sympathetic link, however slight,
with the dim, awful Power, ever receding into more remote and
mysterious distances, was also connected with the need of some
assurance, or fainter hope, of a life beyond the tomb. To that
hope the old classical paganism afforded only slight and
shadowy nutriment. Yet, from hundreds of sepulchral inscriptions
the yearning, often darkened by a doubt, appeals
with pathetic force. Apart, in fact, from the crowd of mere
antiquarian formalists and lovers of spectacle, there were, we
believe, a great mass who longed for some channel through
which they might have the faintest touch of sympathy with
the Infinite Spirit; for some promise, however veiled in
enigmatic symbolism, that this poor, puzzling, ineffectual life
should not close impotently at death.
</p>

<p>
In all the Mazdean pantheon, it has been remarked, Mithra
was the only divine figure that profoundly affected the religious
imagination of Europe. Who can dare at this distance to
pierce the mystery? But we may conjecture that the ascendency
is partly due to his place as mediator in the Persian
hierarchy, partly to the legends, emblazoned on so many slabs,
of his miraculous and Herculean triumphs; but still more to
the moral and sacramental support, and the sure hope of
immortal life which he offered to his faithful worshippers.
Mithra came as a deliverer from powers of evil and as a
mediator between man and the remote Ormuzd. He bears
the latter office in a double sense. In the cosmic system, as
lord of light, he is also lord of the space between the heavenly
ether and the mists of earth. As a solar deity, he is the
central point among the planetary orbs.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 303.</note> In the ubiquitous
group of the slaughtered bull, Mithra stands between the two
Dadophori, Cautes and Cautopates, who form with him a sort
of Trinity, and are said to be incarnations of him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> pp. 207, 208.</note> One of these
figures in Mithraic sculpture always bears a torch erect, the
other a torch turned downwards to the earth. They may have
a double significance. They may figure the ascending light of
dawn, and the last radiance of day as it sinks below the horizon.
They may be taken to image the growth of solar strength to
its midsummer triumphs, and its slow decline towards fading
<pb n="605"/><anchor id="Pg605"/>autumn and the cold of winter. Or again, they may shadow
forth the wider and more momentous processes of universal
death and resurgent life. But Mithra also became a mediator
in the moral sense, standing between Ormuzd and Ahriman,
the powers of good and evil, as Plutarch conceives him.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Is. et Osir.</hi> c. 46.</note> He
is the ever victorious champion, who defies and overthrows the
malignant demons that beset the life of man; who, above all,
gives the victory over the last foe of humanity.
</p>

<p>
The legend of Mithra in hymn or litany is almost entirely
lost. But antiquarian ingenuity and cultivated sympathy have
plausibly recovered some of its meanings from the many
sculptural remains of his chapels. On the great monuments
of Virunum, Mauls, Neuenheim, and Osterburken, can be
seen the successive scenes of the hero’s career. They begin
with his miraculous birth from the <q>mother rock,</q> which was
familiar to Justin Martyr, S. Jerome, and many of the Fathers.<note place="foot">Firm. Matern. c. 20, alterius
profani sacramenti signum est
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">θεός ἐκ πέτρας</foreign>, etc. Cf. S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Adv. Jov.</hi>
i. § 7; Just. Mart. <hi rend="italic">Dial. c. Tryph.</hi>
c. 70; Prud. <hi rend="italic">Cathem.</hi> v. 9; Cumont,
<hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 199, 207.</note>
The dedications <hi rend="italic">petrae genetrici</hi> abound along the Danube, and
the sacred stone was an object of adoration in many chapels.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 160.</note>
A youthful form, his head crowned with a Phrygian cap, a
dagger in one hand, and a torch in the other, is pictured
emerging from an opening rock, around which sometimes a
serpent is coiled. Shepherds from the neighbouring mountain
gaze in wonder at the divine birth, and presently come nearer
to adore the youthful hero, and offer him the firstlings of their
flocks and fields.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 162; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 204.</note> And again, a naked boy is seen screening
himself from the violence of the wind in the shelter of a fig
tree; he eats of its fruit and makes himself a garment from
the leaves.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 164.</note> In another scene, the sacred figure appears in full
eastern costume, armed with a bow from which he launches
an arrow against a rock rising in front of him.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 165;
    <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 204 (p. 318), 235
(p. 338).</note> From the
spot where the arrow strikes the stone, a fountain gushes forth,
and the water is eagerly caught in his upturned palms by a
form kneeling below. Then follow the famous scenes of the
chase and slaughter of the mystic bull. At first the beast is seen
borne in a skiff over an expanse of waters. Soon afterwards
<pb n="606"/><anchor id="Pg606"/>he is grazing quietly in a meadow, when Mithra comes upon
the scene. In one monument the hero is carrying the bull
upon his shoulders; in others he is borne upon the animal’s
back, grasping it by the horns. Or again, the bull is seen in full
career with the hero’s arms thrown around his neck. At last
the bull succumbs to his rider’s courage, and is dragged by
the hind-legs, which are drawn over his captor’s shoulders, into
a cavern where the famous slaughter was enacted.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 167 sq.; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi>
253, 192, 204, 221.</note> The
young god, his mantle floating on the wind, kneels on the
shoulder of the fallen beast, draws back its head with his left
hand, while with the other he buries his dagger in its neck.<note place="foot">See the finest extant specimen from
Osterburken; Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 246; cf.
the one at Heddernheim, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 251.</note>
Below this scene are invariably sculptured the scorpion, the
faithful dog, and the serpent lapping the flowing blood.
The two Dadophori, silent representatives of the worlds of light
and gloom, one on each side, are always calm watchers of the
mystic scene. But the destruction of the bull was not a mere
spectacle of death. It was followed by a miracle of fresh
springing life and fertility, and, here and there, on the slabs
are seen ears of corn shooting from the tail of the dying
beast, or young plants and flowers springing up around.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 186 sq.; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi>
104, 246.</note> His
blood gives birth to the vine which yields the sacred juice
consecrated in the mysteries. Thus, in spite of the scorpion
and the serpent, symbols of the evil powers, who seek to
wither and sterilise the sources of vitality, life is ever rising
again from the body of death.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 70.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mithra’s mysterious reconciliation with the Sun is figured
in other groups.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 191 (p. 312); 203
(p. 317); 242 (p. 342); 246 (p. 350);
Intr. p. 172.</note> Mithra, as usual, in eastern costume, has,
kneeling before him, a youthful figure either naked or lightly
clad. The god touches the head of the suppliant with some
mysterious symbol, and the subject of the rite raises his hands
in prayer. The mystic symbol is removed, and Mithra sets a
radiant crown on the suppliant’s head. This reconciliation of
the two deities is a favourite subject. In the sculpture of
Osterburken, they ratify their pact with solemn gestures before
an altar. Their restored harmony is commemorated in even
<pb n="607"/><anchor id="Pg607"/>more solemn fashion. In one monument the two are reclining
on a couch at a solemn agape, with a table before them bearing
the sacred bread, which is marked with the cross, and both are
in the act of raising the cup in their right hands.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 175.</note>
</p>

<p>
The legend of Mithra, thus faintly and doubtfully reconstructed
from the sacred sculptures, in the absence of express
tradition, must probably for ever remain somewhat of an
enigma. It has been, since the third century, the battle-ground
of ingenious interpreters. To enumerate and discuss
these theories, many of them now discredited by archaeological
research, is far beyond the scope of this work. It is
clear that from the early Chaldaean magi, who, to some
extent, imposed their system on Iranian legend, down to the
Neo-Platonists, the god and his attendants were treated as
the symbols of cosmic theory. The birth from the rock
was the light of dawn breaking over serrated crests of
eastern hills.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 83.</note> The cave, which was always piously perpetuated
in the latest Mithraist architecture, was the solid
vault of heaven, and the openings pierced in its roof were
the stars shining through the celestial dome.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 89.</note> The fountain
which rose in every chapel, the fire on the altar, the animals
surrounding the bull, represent the powers of nature in their
changes and conflict. The young archer, causing water to
spring from the rock by a shot from his bow, marks the
miraculous cessation of prehistoric dearth, as the bull leaping
from a skiff perhaps commemorates a primaeval deluge. The
slaying of the bull, the central scene of all, may go back to
the exploits of the heroic pioneers of settled life, a Hercules
or a Theseus, who tamed the savage wilderness to the uses
of man. It had many meanings to different ages. To one
occupied with the processes of nature, it may have symbolised
the withering of the vegetative freshness of the world in midsummer
heats, yet with a promise of a coming spring. To
another it may have meant a victory over evil spirits and
powers of darkness.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 77.</note> Or it may, in the last days, have been
the prototype of that sacramental cleansing which gave assurance
of immortal life, and which seemed to the Fathers the
mockery of a Diviner Sacrifice.
</p>

<pb n="608"/><anchor id="Pg608"/>

<p>
There can be no doubt that Mithra and his exploits, in
response to a great need, came to have a moral and spiritual
meaning. From the earliest times, he is the mediator between
good and evil powers; ever young, vigorous, and victorious in
his struggles, the champion of truth and purity, the protector
of the weak, the ever vigilant foe of the hosts of daemons
who swarm round the life of man, the conqueror of death.
His religion, in spite of its astrology, was not one of fatalist
reverie; it was a religion of struggle and combat. In this
aspect it was congenial to the virile Roman temperament,
and, above all, to the temperament of the Roman soldier,
at once the most superstitious and the most strenuous of
men.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 108.</note> Who can tell what inspiration the young heroic
figure, wearing an air of triumphant vigour even on the rudest
slabs,<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 31, 35, 43.</note> may have breathed into a worn old veteran, who kept
ceaseless watch against the Germans in some lonely post on
the Danube, when he spent a brief hour in the splendour of
the brilliantly lighted crypt, and joined in the old Mazdean
litany? Before him was the sacred group of the Tauroctonus,
full of so many meanings to many lands and ages, but which,
to his eyes, probably shed the light of victory over the perilous
combats of time, and gave assurance of a larger hope.
Suddenly, by the touch of an unseen hand, the plaque revolved,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> 251 (p. 364).</note>
and he had before him the solemn agape of the two
deities in which they celebrated the peaceful close of their
mystic conflict. And he went away, assured that his hero
god was now enthroned on high, and watching over his faithful
soldiers upon earth.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. pp. 308, 309.</note> At the same time, he had seen around
him the sacred symbols or images of all the great forces of
nature, and of the fires of heaven which, in their motions
and their effluences, could bring bane or happiness to men
below. In the chapels of Mithra, all nature became divine
and sacred, the bubbling spring, the fire on the cottage hearth,
the wind that levelled the pine tree or bore the sailor on his
voyage, the great eternal lights that brought seed-time and
harvest and parted day from night, the ever-welling vital
force in opening leaf and springing corn-ear, and birth of
young creatures, triumphing in regular round over the
<pb n="609"/><anchor id="Pg609"/>malignant forces which seem for a time to threaten decay
and corruption. The <q>Unconquered Mithra</q> is thus the god
of light and hope in this world and the next.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 297.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ancient world was craving for a promise of immortality.
Mithraism strove to nurse the hope, but, like the contemporaneous
Platonism and the more ancient Orphic lore, it
linked it with moral responsibility and grave consequences.
Votaries were taught that the soul descended by graduated fall
from the Most High to dwell for a season in the prison of the
flesh.<note place="foot">Dieterich, <hi rend="italic">Mithrasliturgie</hi>, p. 197;
Cumont, Intr. p. 309.</note> After death there is a great judgment, to decide the
future destiny of each soul, according to the life which had
been led on earth.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 308 sqq.</note> Spirits which have defiled themselves
during life are dragged down by Ahriman and his evil angels,
and may be consigned to torture, or may sink into endless
debasement. The pure, who have been fortified by the holy
mysteries, will mount upwards through the seven spheres, at
each stage parting with some of their lower elements, till, at
last, the subtilised essential spirit reaches the empyrean, and is
received by Mithra into the eternal light.
</p>

<p>
But the conflict between good and evil, even on this earth,
will not last for ever. There will be a second coming of Mithra,
which is to be presaged by great plagues. The dead will
arise from their tombs to meet him. The mystic bull will
again be slain, and his blood, mingled with the juice of the
sacred Haoma, will be drunk by the just, and impart to them
the gift of eternal life.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 310.</note> Fire from heaven will finally devour
all that is evil. Thus the slaughter of the bull, which is the
image of the succession of decay and fructifying power in
physical nature, is also the symbol and guarantee of a final
victory over evil and death. And, typifying such lofty and
consolatory truths, it naturally met the eye of the worshipper
in every chapel. It was also natural that the taurobolium,
which was originally a rite of the Great Mother, should be
absorbed, like so many alien rites and ideas, by the religion
which was the great triumph of syncretism. The baptism of
blood was, indeed, a formal cleansing from impurity of the
flesh; but it was also cleansing in a higher sense. The
inscrip<pb n="610"/><anchor id="Pg610"/>tions of the fourth century, which commemorate the blessing
of the holy rite, often close with the words <hi rend="italic">in aeternum
renatus</hi>.<note place="foot">Réville, p. 150; cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 510;
<hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 2352.</note> How far the phrase expressed a moral resurrection,
how far it records the sure hope of another life, we cannot
presume to say. Whether borrowed from Christian sources
or not, it breathes an aspiration strangely different from the
tone of old Roman religion, even at its best. There may have
been a good deal of ritualism in the cleansing of Mithra.
Yet Mithra was, from the beginning, a distinctly moral power,
and his worship was apparently untainted by the licence which
made other heathen worships schools of cruelty and lust. His
connection, indeed, with some of them, must at times have led
his votaries into more than doubtful company; Sabazius and
Magna Mater were dangerous allies.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6042; Gasquet, p. 112,
on the inscription of Vincentius, priest
of Sabazius, who was buried by the side
of Aurelius, a priest of Mithra; cf.
Réville, p. 92; Renan, <hi rend="italic">M. Aurèle</hi>, pp.
578-9, n. 1.</note> Yet, on the whole, it
has been concluded that Mithraism was a gospel of truth and
purity, although the purity was often a matter of merely ceremonial
purification and abstinence.
</p>

<p>
The day is far distant when the mass of men will be
capable of the austere mystic vision, which relies little on
external ceremonies of worship. Certainly the last ages of
paganism in the West were not ripe for any such reserved
spirituality. And the religions which captivated the ages
that preceded the triumph of the Catholic Church, while they
strove to satisfy the deeper needs of the spirit, were more
intensely sacerdotal, and more highly organised than the old
religions of Greece and Rome. Probably no small part of
their strength lay in sacramental mystery, and an occult
sacred lore which was the monopoly of a class set apart
from the world.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. pp. 299, 323.</note> Our knowledge of the Mithraic priesthood
is unfortunately scanty, and the ancient liturgy has perished.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 313; cf. Dieterich, <hi rend="italic">Mithrasliturgie</hi>,
pp. 25, 26.</note>
But inscriptions mention an <hi rend="italic">ordo sacerdotum</hi>; and Tertullian
speaks of a <q>high pontiff of Mithra</q> and of holy virgins and
persons vowed to continence in his service.<note place="foot">Tert. <hi rend="italic">De Praescrip. Haeret.</hi> c. 40;
cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 2151, Ordo sacerdotum
Mag. suo; xiv. 403; xiv. 65.</note> The priestly
functions were certainly more constant and exacting than those
of the old priestly colleges of Greece and Rome. There were
<pb n="611"/><anchor id="Pg611"/>solemn sacraments and complicated rites of initiation to be
performed. Three times a day, at dawn, noon, and evening,
the litany to the Sun was recited.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 325.</note> Daily sacrifice was offered
at the altars of various gods, with chanting and music. The
climax of the solemn office was probably marked by the
sounding of a bell.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 325; cf. Lafaye, <hi rend="italic">Div.
d’Alexandrie</hi>, p. 138; flutes and bells
have been found among débris of
chapels, Cum. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 253 (p. 380); Intr.
p. 68.</note> And turning on a pivot, the sacred slab
in the apse displayed, for the adoration of the faithful, the
scene of the holy feast of Mithra and the Sun after their
reconciliation. The seventh day of the week was sacred to
the Sun, the sixteenth of each month to Mithra, and the 25th
of December, as marking the sun’s entrance on a new course
of triumph, was the great festival of Mithra’s sacred year.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 125.</note>
</p>

<p>
Initiation in the mysteries, after many rites of cleansing
and trial, was the crowning privilege of the Mithraist believer.
The gradation of spiritual rank, and the secrecy which bound
the votaries to one another in a sacred freemasonry, were a
certain source of power. S. Jerome alone has preserved for
us the seven grades through which the neophyte rose to full
communion. They were Corax, Cryphius, Miles, Leo, Perses,
Heliodromus, and Pater.<note place="foot">S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 107, § 2; Gasquet,
pp. 91, 2; 96; Cumont, Intr. p. 315;
Réville, p. 97.</note> What their origin was who shall
say? They may correspond to the seven planets, and mark
the various stages of the descent of the soul into flesh, and
its rise again to the presence of God. According to Porphyry,
the first three stages were merely preliminary to complete
initiation. Only the Lions were full and real communicants,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">De Abstin.</hi> iv. 16. Porphyry connects
the degrees with ideas of metempsychosis,
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τὴν κοινότητα ἡμῶν τὴν πρὸς τὰ ζῷα αἰνιττόμενοι, κτλ.</foreign></note>
and the title Leo certainly appears oftenest on inscriptions.
The dignity Pater Patrum, or Pater Patratus, was much coveted,
and conferred a real authority over the brethren, with an
official title to their reverence.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 101; Réville, p. 97.</note> The admission to each successive
grade was accompanied by symbolic ceremonies, as
when the Miles put aside the crown twice tendered to him,
saying that Mithra was his only crown.<note place="foot">Tert. <hi rend="italic">De Corona</hi>, xv.</note> The veil of
the Cryphius, and the Phrygian bonnet of the Perses, have a
significance or a history which needs no comment. Admission
<pb n="612"/><anchor id="Pg612"/>to full communion was preceded by austerities and ordeals
which were made the subject of exaggeration and slander.
The neophyte, blindfold and bound, was obliged to pass
through flame. It was said that he had to take part in a
simulated murder with a blood-dripping sword. On the
sculpture of Heddernheim a figure is seen standing deep in
snow. These ceremonies probably went back to the scenes
and ages in which mutilations in honour of Bellona and Magna
Mater took their rise. They may also have been a lesson, or a
test of apathy and moral courage.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 322.</note> But the tales of murder
and torture connected with these rites have probably no better
foundation than similar slanders about the early Christian
mysteries.<note place="foot">Lamprid. <hi rend="italic">Commodus Ant.</hi> c. 9, sacra
Mithriaca homicidio vero polluit, cum
illic aliquid ad speciem timoris, vel dici
vel fingi soleat; Gasquet, p. 90.</note>
</p>

<p>
The votaries of Mithra, like those of Isis and other eastern
deities, formed themselves into guilds which were organised on
the model of ordinary sodalities and colleges. As funerary
societies, or under the shelter of Magna Mater, they escaped
persecution. They had their roll of members, their council of
decurions, their masters and curators.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 326. For the
organisation of the societies of Magna
Mater <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Foucart, <hi rend="italic">Associations Religieuses</hi>,
p. 20 sqq. Cf <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 717;
vi. 734; vi. 3728; xiv. 286; <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi>
6042 (Sentinum).</note> And, like the secular
colleges, they depended to a great extent, for the erection of
chapels and the endowment of their services, on the generosity
of their wealthier members and patrons.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6042; on the doubt, however,
as to the meaning of <hi rend="italic">patroni</hi> in
this inscription <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> <hi rend="italic">Henz.</hi> note; and
Cumont, Intr. p. 327, n. 4.</note> One man might give
the site of a chapel, another a marble altar; a poor slave might
contribute out of his <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi> a lamp or little image to adorn
the walls of the crypt.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
One undoubted cause of the success of Mithra in the West
was the spirit of fraternity and charity which was fostered
in his guilds. The hopeless obscurity and depression of the
plebeian and servile classes had some alleviation in companies
where, for the moment, the poor and lowly-born found himself
on an equality with his social superiors. Plebeians and the
slaves had a great part in the propagation of the eastern
worships, and especially that of the God of Light.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 264. Cf. dedications by
slaves or liberti, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> 67, 245, 175,
53, 410, 47, 178, 292.</note> In his
<pb n="613"/><anchor id="Pg613"/>mysteries and guilds the highest dignities were open to them.<note place="foot">Cf. <hi rend="italic">Or. Henz.</hi> 6042; Cumont, Intr.
p. 327, n. 4.</note>
Moreover, from the size of the chapels it is clear that the
congregations were generally small, so that the members of
lower social importance were not lost in a crowd.<note place="foot">For the dimensions of one at Rome
<hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 19 (p. 205).</note> Growing
numbers were accommodated, not by enlarging, but by multiplying
the shrines.
</p>

<p>
In the sacraments of Mithra, Tertullian and other Apologists
perceived a diabolic parody of the usages of the Church.<note place="foot">Tert. <hi rend="italic">De Pr. Haeret.</hi> c. 40.</note>
The <hi rend="italic">acceptio</hi> of the neophytes, the <hi rend="italic">sacramentum</hi>, in which
they were pledged to secrecy and holy service, the sign or
brand made on the brow of the Miles, the ablutions or
baptism with holy water, as in the rites of Isis, whatever their
origin, could not fail, in an age of death-struggle for supremacy,
to arouse the suspicions and fears of the champions of the
Church.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 84; Cumont, Intr.
p. 318.</note> Finally, the consecrated bread and mingled water
and wine, which were only offered to the higher grades, may
well have seemed the last and worst profanation of the most
solemn Christian rite. The draught from the mystic cup,
originally the juice of Haoma, was supposed to have supernatural
effects. It imparted not only health and prosperity
and wisdom, but also the power to conquer the spirits of evil
and darkness, and a secret virtue which might elude the grasp
of death.<note place="foot">Gasquet, pp. 81, 82; Cumont, Intr.
p. 320.</note>
</p>

<p>
The temples in which these rites took place repeated for ages
the same original type. Mithra and his cave are inseparable
ideas, and the name <hi rend="italic">spelaeum</hi>, <hi rend="italic">antrum</hi>, or <hi rend="italic">specus</hi>, remained
to the end the regular designation of his chapels.<note place="foot">Just. Mart, c. 78; Porphyr. <hi rend="italic">De
Antro Nymph.</hi> c. 5; Tertull. <hi rend="italic">De Cor.</hi>
xv.; S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 57, 107.</note> In country
places, grottoes or recesses on the side of a rocky hill might
supply a natural oratory of the ancient type.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 57; <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 237.</note> But, in the
centre of great towns, the skill of the architect had to simulate
the rude structure of the original cavern. Entering through
an open portico, the worshipper found himself in an antechapel,
through which he passed into another chamber which
was called the <hi rend="italic">apparatorium</hi>, where the priests and neophytes
arrayed themselves in their robes or masques before the holy
<pb n="614"/><anchor id="Pg614"/>rites.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 59. Cf. <hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi>
iii. 1096, cryptam cum porticibus et
apparatorio et exedra, etc.; iii. 3960.</note> Thence they descended by stairs to the level of the
cave-like crypt, which was the true sanctuary. On each side
there ran a bench of stone, on which was ranged the company
of the initiated.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 61; <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> the sketch
of the Mithraeum under the Church of
S. Clement, at Rome, Cumont, <hi rend="italic"><anchor id="corr614"/><corr sic="(italics added)">Mon.</corr></hi> 19.</note> The central aisle led up to the apse, against
the walls of which was set the sculptured scene of the slaying
of the bull, surrounded by the symbolic figures and emblems
of Chaldaean star-lore, with altars in front.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 19.</note> This was the
holiest place, and, from some remains, it would seem to have
been railed in, like the chancel of one of our churches.<note place="foot">Id. Intr. p. 64.</note>
The neophyte, as he approached, must have been impressed by
a dazzling scene. On either side the congregation knelt in
prayer. Countless lamps shed their brilliant light on the
forms of ancient Hellenic gods, or on the images of the mighty
powers of earth or ether<note place="foot">Twenty-six lamps were found in one
Mithraeum, Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 250 (p. 362).
For the classical gods, cf. <hi rend="italic">Mon.</hi> 221
(p. 326), 235, 246 (p. 349).</note>—above all, on the sacred scene which
was the memorial of the might of the <q>unconquered.</q> The
ancient rhythmic litany was chanted to the sound of music;
the lights came and went in startling alternations of splendour
and gloom. The draught of the sacred cup seemed to ravish
the sense. And the votary, as in the Isiac vision in Apuleius,
for a moment seemed borne beyond the bounds of space and
time into mystic distances.<note place="foot">Apul. <hi rend="italic">Met.</hi> xi. c. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Persian cult owed much of its success to imperial and
aristocratic favour. The last pagan emperor of the West,
the last generation of the pagan aristocracy, were devotees of
the Sun-god. It is a curious thing that even under the early
Empire Mithraism seems never to have suffered from the
suspicion and persecution with which other alien worships had
to contend.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 279 sqq.</note> Its close league with the cult of the Great Mother,
which, since the second century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, had been an established
institution, may have saved Mithra from official mistrust. He
also emerged into prominence in the age in which imperial
jealousy of guilds and colleges was visibly relaxing its precautions.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">v.</hi> supra, <ref target="Pg254">p. 254</ref>.</note>
A more satisfying explanation may perhaps be
found in the sympathy of the Flavian dynasty<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> iv. v. vii.; <hi rend="italic">Tit.</hi> v.;
<hi rend="italic">Domit.</hi> i. xiv.; cf. Renan, <hi rend="italic">Les Évangiles</hi>,
p. 226 sq.; <hi rend="italic">L’Antéchrist</hi>, p. 491.</note> and the
<pb n="615"/><anchor id="Pg615"/>princes of the third century for the religious ideas of the East,
and in the manifest support which heliolatry lent to growing
absolutism and the worship of the Caesars.
</p>

<p>
The apotheosis of the emperors began even in the time
of the first Caesar, who rose to the highest divine honours
before his death. But it was long a fluctuating and hesitating
creed. The provinces, and particularly the cities of Asia
Minor,<note place="foot">D. Cass. xliii. 14; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Ann.</hi> iv. 15;
vi. 18.</note> were more eager to decree temples and divine honours
to the lord of the world than even the common people of Italy.
The superstitious masses and the soldiery, indeed, were equal to
any enthusiasm of flattery and superstition. But the cultivated
upper class, in spite of the effusive compliance of court
poets,<note place="foot">Mart. ix. 4.</note> having but little belief in any Divine Powers, were not
likely to yield an easy faith to the godhead of a Claudius or
a Nero.<note place="foot">Sen. <hi rend="italic">Lud. De Morte Claud.</hi> c. 12;
cf. Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p. 193.</note> The emperors themselves, belonging to this class, and
often sharing its fastidious scepticism, for a time judiciously
restrained a too exuberant devotion to their person.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Aug.</hi> c. lii.</note> The
influence of Herod may have filled the lunatic imagination of
Caligula with dreams of an eastern despotism and the superhuman
dignity of kings.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Calig.</hi> c. xxii.; Meriv. vi. pp.
4-9.</note> Nero, who had visions of a new
monarchy with its seat on eastern hills, may have rejoiced in
being adored by Tiridates as the equal of Mithra.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxiii. 5,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">ἦλθον πρός σε τὸν ἐμὸν θεὸν προσκυνήσων σε ὡς καὶ τὸν Μίθραν</foreign>.</note> But the
politic Augustus, while he permitted the foundation of temples
and priestly orders in his honour throughout the provinces,
and even in Italian towns, along with the divinity of Rome,
obstinately refused to have shrines erected to him in the
capital.<note place="foot">Suet. <hi rend="italic">Aug.</hi> lii.; D. Cass. li. 20;
lxvii. 13; Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. p. 163.</note> Tiberius pursued the same policy, which was congenial
to his cold, realistic temperament. Vespasian, although
eastern superstition had a certain charm for him, jested on his
death-bed about his own claims to divinity.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Vesp.</hi> c. xxiii. vae, inquit, puto,
deus fio.</note> It was reserved
for his son Domitian to be the first emperor who claimed the
salutation of <q>Dominus et Deus</q> in his lifetime.<note place="foot">Id. <hi rend="italic">Domit.</hi> c. xiii.</note> The best
of the early emperors aspired to full divine honours only when
their career on earth had closed.
</p>

<pb n="616"/><anchor id="Pg616"/>

<p>
Many historic causes made their posthumous elevation to
divine rank seem not unnatural. The cult of the Manes,
or good spirits of departed friends and ancestors, prepared the
Roman mind to adore the memory of the father of the State.
The legendary kings of the Latin race—Saturnus, Faunus, Picus,
Latinus—were worshipped as <hi rend="italic">Di indigetes</hi>;<note place="foot">Virg. <hi rend="italic">Georg.</hi> i. 498; Warde Fowler,
<hi rend="italic">Rom. Festivals</hi>, p. 258.</note> Romulus had
vanished in a tempest and been carried up to heaven to join
the company of the gods. The hero-worship of the Greeks,
which raised to semi-divine state after death those who had done
great deeds of service to mankind, who had founded cities,
or manifested splendid gifts of mind or body, influenced the
imagination of a people who had long sat at the feet of Greece.
Greek cities raised altars to Rome and to Roman generals who
had enslaved them.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">Flamin.</hi> c. 16; cf. Herod. v.
47; Thuc. v. 11.</note> When the Senate decreed divine honours
to a dead emperor, he became <hi rend="italic">divus</hi>, not <hi rend="italic">deus</hi>, at least to the
cultivated class, and <hi rend="italic">divus</hi> is a title which even modern
sentiment might accord to men who have borne a great and
shining part in a world-wide system of administration. The
Spartan women were said to call great warriors, men who won
their admiration by gallantry, <q>divine.</q><note place="foot">Plato, <hi rend="italic">Meno</hi>, 99 <hi rend="small">D</hi>.</note> To the masses the
dead emperor no doubt became a veritable god, as the image
of M. Aurelius two centuries after his death was found among
the <hi rend="italic">penates</hi> of every pious family in the West.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">M. Aurel.</hi> c. 18.</note> But the
philosophic man of the world might also honestly accept the imperial
apotheosis by the decree of the Senate, in the sense that
another figure had been added to the rare company of those
who have been lifted by fortune or merit far above their
fellows, and have filled a great space in the life of humanity.
People, who for generations erected shrines to the minion of
Hadrian, might easily believe in the claims of the Antonine
emperors to a place among the gods.
</p>

<p>
The influence of Egypt and Persia lent its force to stimulate
native and original tendencies to king-worship, and to develop
the principate of Augustus into the theocratic despotism of
Aurelian and Diocletian. The eastern peoples were always
eager to lavish on the emperors the adoration which they had
been used to offer to their native princes. The ancient
<pb n="617"/><anchor id="Pg617"/>Pharaohs had been revered as incarnations of the deity and
gods upon earth.<note place="foot">Boissier, <hi rend="italic">Rel. Rom.</hi> i. 125; Cumont,
Intr. p. 283 sqq.</note> The Ptolemies inherited and utilised so
useful a superstition. These ideas spread into Italy with
the diffusion of the Isiac cult among the upper class, and
through the influence of travellers and envoys who kept up
a fruitful intercourse between Alexandria and Rome. But
Egypt went rather too far for the western mind in its apotheosis
of kings.<note place="foot">Amm. Marc. xv. 1, 3.</note> A more potent and congenial influence came from
the lands of the remoter East. The Persians prostrated themselves
before their monarchs, but they did not actually adore
them as gods. They reverenced the daemon, or, in Roman
phrase, the <q>genius Caesaris,</q> without worshipping the monarch
himself.<note place="foot">Athen. vi. 252,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τράπεζαν παρετίθει χωρὶς ὀνομάζων τῷ δαίμωνι τῷ βασιλέως</foreign>.</note> The king was supposed to be enlightened, inspired,
and guarded by a heavenly grace; his brow was crowned by a
divine aureole. Yet he was not the equal of God. But the
majesty and fortune of kings was something divine and supernatural;
they reigned by special grace and had a divine protection.
The dynasties who succeeded to the great heritage of
the East exploited these ideas to the full, and the most solemn
oath was by the Fortune of the King.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 286.</note> The superstition of
Chaldaea, which connected all human destiny with the orbs of
heaven, exercised a profound influence for many centuries both
in the East and West. And the Sun, the monarch of the
heavens, often identified with Mithra, was regarded as the
special patron of kings, enduing them with irresistible power,
and guarding their lofty destiny. These ideas spread easily
from Pontus and Commagene into the western world. In
eastern cities, Caligula and Nero had altars raised to them as
solar deities,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 290, n. 2.</note> and Tiridates offered to Nero the adoration due
to Mithra.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxiii. 5,
    <foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">καὶ ἦλθον πρός σε τὸν ἐμὸν θεόν,
        προσκυνήσων σε ὡς καὶ τὸν Μίθραν</foreign>.</note> The enigmatical goddess Fortuna, who seems
to have had early associations with the Sun,<note place="foot">W. Fowler, <hi rend="italic">Roman Festivals</hi>, p. 169.</note> gained fresh
strength from the ideas of the divinised destiny of eastern
monarchs. According to Plutarch, Tyche left the regions of
Assyria and Persia to make her home on the Palatine.<note place="foot">Plut. <hi rend="italic">De Fort. Rom.</hi> iv.
<foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">οὕτως ἡ τύχη καταλιποῦσα Πέρσας καὶ Ἀσσυρίους ...
τῷ δὲ Παλατίῳ προσερχομένη, κτλ.</foreign></note> The
<pb n="618"/><anchor id="Pg618"/>republican <q>Fortune of the Roman People</q> naturally passed
into the <q>Fortuna Augusti,</q> which appears on the imperial
coins from the reign of Vespasian. In the age of the
Antonines, the image of the goddess in gold always stood in
the prince’s bed-chamber, and was transferred at the hour of
his death to his successor.<note place="foot">Capitol. <hi rend="italic">Ant. P.</hi> c. 12.</note> With the reign of Commodus, who
was himself initiated both in the Isiac and Mithraic mysteries,
begins the temporary triumph of the oriental cults, which was
to reach its height in the reign of Julian. The absence of full
materials for the history of the third century,<note place="foot">Cf. Vop. <hi rend="italic">Prob.</hi> c. i. § 3.</note> a century crowded
with great events, and pregnant with great spiritual movements,
should perhaps impose greater caution in tracing the development
of imperial power than some writers have always observed.
Yet there can be little doubt that the monarchy of the West
tended to become a theocratic despotism, and that Persian Sun-worship
had a large share in this development. There was
always a sober sense in the West which rebelled against
the oriental apotheosis of the prince.<note place="foot">Cf. Amm. Marc. xv. 1, 3.</note> Yet the iterated
adulation, so often recorded faithfully in the Augustan
History, reveals an extraordinary abasement of the upper
class before the person of the emperor.<note place="foot">Cf. Amm. Marc. xv. 1, 3.</note> The emperors never,
indeed, claimed like the Sassanids to be <q>brothers or sons of
the Sun and Moon.</q><note place="foot">Amm. Marc. xxiii. 6, 5, unde reges
ejusdem gentis praetumidi appellari se
patiuntur Solis fratres et Lunae.</note> But in their official style and insignia
there were many approaches to the divine claims of the
monarchs of the East. The title <hi rend="italic">invictus</hi>, sacred to Mithra
and the Sun, was assumed by Commodus, and borne by his
successors.<note place="foot">D. Cass. lxxii. 15, 5.</note> The still more imposing title of <q>eternal,</q> springing
from the same origin, came into vogue in the third century,
and appears in the edicts of the last shadowy emperors of the
fifth. From the reign of Nero, the imperial crown with
darting rays, symbolised the solar ancestry of the prince.
Gallienus used to go forth crowned in this manner, and with
gold dust in his hair, and raised a colossal statue of himself in
the garb of the Sun.<note place="foot">Treb. Poll. <hi rend="italic">Gallien.</hi> 16, 18, crinibus
suis auri scobem aspersit, etc.</note> The coins of Aurelian, who built the
great temple of the Sun from the spoils of Palmyra, bear the
legend <q>deo et domino nato.</q><note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 291, n. 5.</note> The West probably never took
<pb n="619"/><anchor id="Pg619"/>these assumptions so literally as the East. But metaphor
and imagery tended to become a real faith. The centre of
the great religion which was to be the last stronghold of
paganism, was the prototype of the emperor in the starry
world, and his protector on earth. And the solar grace which
surrounded the prince found an easy explanation in the mystic
philosophy of the soul’s descent which had been absorbed by
Mithraism. In coming to earth from the empyrean, the
future lord of the world received a special gift of grace and
power from the great luminary which is the source of light
and life. The religion of the Sun thus tended to become a
great spiritual support of an absolutism which was more and
more modelling itself on the royalty of the East. The cult of
the Sun, which was established in such splendour in 273 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>
by Aurelian, must have had a great effect in preparing for
the oriental claims of monarchy from the reign of Diocletian.
Thirty years after the foundation of the stately shrine on
the Esquiline, and only twenty years before the conversion
of Constantine, all the princes of the imperial house, Jovii
Herculii, Augusti, Caesares, as an inscription tells, united to
restore a temple of Mithra at Carnuntum, his holy city on the
Danube.<note place="foot">Cumont, <hi rend="italic">Inscr.</hi> No. 367.</note> But the days of Mithra as the god of kings were
numbered. After the establishment of the Christian Empire, he
had a brief illusory triumph in the reign of Julian, and again in
the short-lived effort of reaction led by Eugenius and Nicomachus
Flavianus, which had a tragic close in the battle on the Frigidus.
Yet his mystic theology was the theme of debate among Roman
nobles, trained in the philosophy of Alexandria, long after his
last chapels had been buried in ruins; and his worship lingered
in secluded valleys of the Alps or the Vosges into the fifth
century.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 17; Cumont, Intr.
p. 348. The Mithraeum of Sarreburg
seems to have been frequented till
395 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi></note> The theocratic claim of monarchy, to which Mithra
lent his support for so many generations, was destined, in its
symbols and phrases, to have a long reign.
</p>

<p>
M. Renan has hazarded the opinion that, if the Christian
Church had been stricken with some mortal weakness, Mithraism
might have become the religion of the western world.
And, indeed, its marvellously rapid diffusion in Italy and the
<pb n="620"/><anchor id="Pg620"/>provinces along the Danube and the Rhine, in the second and
third centuries, might well have inspired the hope of such a
splendid destiny. Although it was primarily a kingly and
military creed, it appealed in the end to all classes, by many
various attractions. Springing from remote regions of the East,
it seemed instinctively to seize the opportunity offered by a
marvellous political unity, along with anarchy in morals and
religion, to satisfy the imperious needs of a world eager for
spiritual light and hope, but distracted among the endless
claimants for its devotion. Philosophy had long tried and was
still trying to find a spiritual synthesis, and to draw from old
mythologies a support for life and conduct. Might not
religion succeed where philosophy had failed? Or rather,
might not religion gather up into itself the forces of philosophy,
and transmute and glorify them in a great concrete symbol?
Might not the claims of the past be harmonised with the higher
intuitions of a more instructed age, and the countless cults
embraced within the circuit of the Roman power be reconciled
with the supreme reverence for one central divine figure, as the
liberties of an Alpine canton, like those of a great city of Asia,
were sheltered under the unchallenged supremacy of Rome?
Mithra made the effort, and for the time he succeeded. In his
progress to what seemed an almost assured victory, he swept into
his orbit the Greek and Latin and Phrygian gods—nay, even the
gods of Celtic cantons.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 332, n. 3.</note> They all found a place in his crypts,
beside his own sacred image and the Persian deities of his
original home. Their altars were ranged around his chapels, and
were duly visited by his priests. Yet, though the Persian deity
might seem very cosmopolitan and liberal in his indulgence to
parochial devotion, he never abated his own lofty claims, and
he never forgot his ancestry. While he might ally himself
with Magna Mater and Jupiter Dolichenus, he coldly repulsed
any association with Isis and Serapis, who were his rivals for
oecumenical sway. The old hostility between the worships of
Persia and Egypt was only softened in the internecine conflict
of both with a more powerful foe. It is only in the last stone
records that a votary of Mithra is found combining a devotion
to Isis.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 504, 846; C. Volusianus
was perhaps Praef. Urb. in 365 or
Consul in 314.</note> The claims of the Sun-god to spiritual primacy are
<pb n="621"/><anchor id="Pg621"/>expounded in the orations of Julian and the dissertations of
Praetextatus in the <hi rend="italic">Saturnalia</hi> of Macrobius. Monotheism in
the pagan world was not, indeed, a new thing. It goes back
to the philosophers of Ionia and Elea, to Aeschylus and Plato.
Nor was syncretism unknown to earlier ages. The Greeks of
the days of Herodotus identified the gods of Egypt with their
own, as Julius Caesar and Tacitus identified Gallic and German
deities with those of the Roman pantheon.<note place="foot">Herod, ii. 48, 50; Caes. <hi rend="italic">B.G.</hi> vi. 17; Tac. <hi rend="italic">Germ.</hi> c. 9.</note> But the monotheistic
syncretism of Mithra was a broader and more sweeping
movement. Local and national gods represented single
aspects of nature. Mithra was seated at the centre on which
all nature depends. If nature-worship was to justify itself in
the eyes of philosophic reason, men must rise to the adoration
of the Sun-king, the head of a great hierarchy of divine forces,
by means of which he acts and diffuses his inexhaustible energy
throughout the universe. And such is the claim made for him
by Praetextatus, in the <hi rend="italic">Saturnalia</hi> of Macrobius, who was a
high adept in the mysteries of Mithra.
</p>

<p>
But the world needed more than a great physical force to
assuage its cravings; it demanded a moral God, Who could raise
before the eyes of men a moral ideal, and support them in striving
to attain it; One Who could guide and comfort in the struggles
of life, and in the darkness of its close, Who could prepare the
trembling soul for the great ordeal, in which the deeds done in
the body are sifted on the verge of the eternal world. In fulfilling
his part, Mithra could rely on his own early character as a
god of truth and righteousness, a mediator between the powers
of good and evil: he had also the experience of the classic
mysteries, stretching back to the legendary Orpheus, which, in
whatever crude, shadowy symbolism, had taught for ten
centuries the doctrine of a moral sequence between this life
and the next. The descent of the soul into gross material
form, and its possible ascent again, if duly fortified, to ethereal
worlds, was common to Mithra and the Orphic and Pythagorean
systems. Such a system on one side sad and pessimist, on
another was full of the energy of hope. And Mithraism
combined the two. It was a religion of strenuous effort and
warfare, with the prospect of high rewards in some far-off
eternal life.
</p>

<pb n="622"/><anchor id="Pg622"/>

<p>
It is little wonder that the Fathers, from the second century,
saw in Mithra the most formidable foe of Christ. Indeed, the
resemblances between the two religions, some of them superficial,
others of a deeper kind, were very striking. How far
some of these were due to a common stock of ideas in East and
West, how far they were the result of conscious borrowing
and mutual imitation, seems to be an insoluble problem. The
most learned student of the cult of Mithra is the most cautious
in his conclusions on the subject.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. pp. 341, 2.</note> On the one hand, the
two religions, in outlying regions of the Empire, long followed
different lines of dispersion. Christianity from its origin in
the religion of Israel, spread at first among the cities on the
Mediterranean, chiefly where there were colonies of Jews.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 339.</note> On
the other hand, outside Italy, Mithraism, which was propagated
by soldiers and imperial officers, followed the line of the
camps and centres of commerce chiefly along the great rivers
of the northern frontier. Yet at Ostia and Rome and elsewhere,
the two eastern religions must have been early brought face
to face. In the syncretism of that age, the age of Gnosticism,
rites and doctrines passed easily from one system to another.
Mithra certainly absorbed much from kindred worships of
Asia Minor, from Hellenic mysteries, and from Alexandrian
philosophy. It is equally certain that the Church did not
disdain a policy of accommodation, along with the consecration
of altars of Christ in the old shrines of paganism. The cult
of local heroes was transferred to saints and martyrs. Converts
found it hard to part with consecrated phrases and forms of
devotion, and might address Jesus in epithets sacred to the
Sun. Some Christians in the fifth century still saluted the
rising sun with a prayer.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 341; cf. Gasquet, p. 118 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Futile attempts have been made to find parallels to Biblical
narrative or symbolism in the faint and faded legend of Mithra
recovered from his monuments, the miraculous birth, the
sacred rock, the adoration of the shepherds, the grotto,—above
all, in the mystic sacrifice of the bull, which seemed to occupy
the same space in Mithraic devotion as the Sacrifice on
Calvary. But one great weakness of Mithraism lay precisely
here—that, in place of the narrative of a Divine life, instinct
<pb n="623"/><anchor id="Pg623"/>with human sympathy, it had only to offer the cold symbolism
of a cosmic legend. In their offices and sacramental system
the two religions had a more real affinity. Mithra had his
baptism and confirmation of new disciples, his ablutions, ascetic
preparation for the sacred mysteries, and holy feasts of the consecrated
bread and wine, where the mystic draught gave purity
and life to soul and body, and was the passport to a life in God.
The sacerdotal and liturgical character of his worship, with its
striking symbolism, using to the full the emotional effects of
lights and music and sacred pomp, offered to souls, who were
ripe for a diviner faith, some of that magical charm which was
to be exerted over so many ages by the Catholic Church. There
are, however, deeper and more fundamental resemblances between
the faiths of Mithra and of Christ, and it was to these that the
Persian cult owed its great superiority to classical mythology
and the official Roman paganism. It responded to a great
spiritual movement, of which it is one great object of this book
to show the sweep and direction. Formal devotion and ascetic
discipline were linked with lofty doctrines as to the origin of the
human spirit and an immortal destiny, depending on conduct,
as well as sacramental grace, through Mithra the mediator.
While the vulgar may have rested in the external charm and
power of the worship, there were others who drank in a more
spiritual creed expounded to us by one of the last Neo-Platonic
votaries of the Sun-God. It told of a fall of the soul into the
duress of the body, for a brief period of probation, of a
resurrection and great judgment, of a final ascent and beatitude
in the life in God, or of endless exile from His presence.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Som. Scip.</hi> i. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
And yet the two systems were separated by an impassable
gulf, and Mithra had associations which could not save him
from the fate of Jupiter and Demeter, of Hecate and Isis.
It is true that his fate was hastened by hostile forces and
causes external to religion. Many of his shrines in the
Danubian provinces, and along the upper Rhine, were desolated
and buried in ruins by the hordes of invaders in the third
century.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 344.</note> And in the fourth century, the fiercest assaults of
the Christian Empire were directed against the worship which
was thought to be the patron of magic arts, and a device
of the Evil One to travesty and defy the Religion of the
<pb n="624"/><anchor id="Pg624"/>Cross.<note place="foot">S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 107 (Ad Laetam).</note> But material force, however fiercely and decisively
exerted, although it hastened the doom of the Persian god,
only anticipated an inevitable defeat.
</p>

<p>
A certain severity in Mithraism, which marked it off honourably
from other worships of the East, also weakened it as a
popular and enduring force. The absence of the feminine
charm in its legend, while it saved it from the sensual taint
of other heathen systems, deprived it of a fascination for the
softer and more emotional side of human nature.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 134.</note> Although
women may, perhaps, have not been altogether excluded from
his mysteries,<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 329; Porphyr. <hi rend="italic">De
Abstin.</hi> iv. 36; cf. Gasquet, p. 98.</note> still Mithra did not welcome them with the
warm sympathy which gave Demeter and Magna Mater and
Isis so firm a hold on the imagination of women for many
generations. The Mater Dolorosa has in all ages been an
enthralling power. The legend of the Tauroctonus was a
religion for strenuous men. And even its symbolism, with all
its strange spell, seems to lack depth and warmth for human
nature as a whole. It would indeed be rash to set limits to
the power of pious sentiment to transfigure and vivify the most
unspiritual materials. And the slaughtered bull in the apse
of every chapel of Mithra may have aroused in the end visions
and mystic emotion which had passed far beyond the sphere
of astral symbolism.
</p>

<p>
Yet such spiritual interpretation of ancient myth is only
for the few, who find in a worship what they bring. For
the gross masses, the symbolism of natural processes, however
majestic, could never have won that marvellous power which
has made a single Divine, yet human, life the inexhaustible
source of spiritual strength for all the future. With all his
heroic effort to make himself a moral and spiritual force,
Mithra remained inextricably linked with the nature-worships
of the past. And, with such associations, even the God of
light could not be lord of the spiritual future of humanity.
Mithraism, with all its strange moral force, with all its charm of
antiquity and sacramental rite, with all its charity and tolerance,
had within it the germs of a sure mortality. In its tolerance lay
precisely its great weakness. The Christian Church might,
in S. Augustine’s phrase, <q>spoil the Egyptians,</q> it might borrow
<pb n="625"/><anchor id="Pg625"/>and adapt rites and symbols from pagan temples, or ideas from
Greek philosophy.<note place="foot">Hatch, <hi rend="italic">Hibbert Lectures</hi>, pp. 49,
135, 292.</note> But in borrowing, it transfigured them.
In all that was essential, the Church would hold no truce with
paganism. <q>Break the idols and consecrate the temples</q>
was the motto of the great Pontiff. But Mithra was ready to
shelter the idols under his purer faith. The images of Jupiter
and Venus, of Mars and Hecate, of the local deities of Dacia
and Upper Germany, find a place in his chapels beside the
antique symbols of the Persian faith.<note place="foot">Cumont, Intr. p. 334.</note> And thus, in spite
of a lofty moral mysticism, Mithra was loaded with the
heritage of the heathen past. A man admitted to his highest
ministry might also worship at the old altars of Greece
and Rome. The last hierophant of Eleusis was a high-priest
of Mithra.<note place="foot">Gasquet, p. 137.</note> Human nature and religious sentiment are so
complex that men of the sincere monotheistic faith of
Symmachus, Praetextatus, and Macrobius, have left the almost
boastful record of an all-embracing laxity of tolerance on their
tombs.<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">C.I.L.</hi> vi. 500, 504, 511, 1779.</note> On many of these slabs you may read that the man
who has been a <q>father</q> in the mysteries of Mithra, who has
been <q>born again</q> in the taurobolium, is also a priest of
Hecate, the goddess of dark arts and baleful spirits of the
night.<note place="foot">Maury, <hi rend="italic">La Magie</hi>, p. 54.</note> Through the astral fatalism of Babylon, Mithra was
inseparably connected with the darkest superstitions of East
or West,<note place="foot"><hi rend="italic">Ib.</hi> p. 146.</note> which covered all sorts of secret crime and perfidy,
which lent themselves to seduction, conspiracy, and murder,
which involved the denial of a moral Providence of the world.
Many a pious devotee of Mithra and Hecate would have
recoiled, as much as we do, from the last results of his
superstition. Such people probably wished only to gain
another ally in facing the terrors of the unseen world. Yet
there can be little doubt that the majestic supremacy of
Mithra, through its old connection with Babylon, sheltered
some of the most degrading impostures of superstition.
</p>

<p>
So rooted is religious sentiment in reverence for the past,
for what our fathers have loved and venerated, that men will
long tolerate, or even wistfully cherish, sacred forms and ideas
which their moral sense has outgrown. Down to the last years
<pb n="626"/><anchor id="Pg626"/>of the fourth century, the Persian worship was defended with
defiant zeal by members of the proudest Roman houses. In
their philosophic gatherings in the reign of Honorius, they found
in Sun-worship the sum and climax of the pagan devotion of
the past.<note place="foot">Macrob. <hi rend="italic">Sat.</hi> i. 17, § 4.</note> Many a pious old priest of Mithra, in the reign of
Gratian, was probably filled with wonder and sorrow when he
saw a Gracchus and his retinue break into the sanctuary
and tear down the venerable symbols from the wall of the
apse.<note place="foot">S. Hieron. <hi rend="italic">Ep.</hi> 107, § 2.</note> He deemed himself the prophet of a pure immemorial
faith, as pure as that of Galilee. He was probably a man of
irreproachable morals, with even a certain ascetic sanctity,
unspotted by the world. He treasured the secret lore of the
mysterious East, which sped the departing soul with the last
comforting sacraments on its flight to ethereal worlds. But he
could not see, or he could not regret, that every day when he
said his liturgy, as he made the round of the altars, he was
lending the authority of a purer faith to other worships which
had affrighted or debauched and enervated the Roman world
for forty generations. He could not see that the attempt to wed
a high spiritual ideal with nature-worship was doomed to failure.
The masses around him remained in their grossness and darkness.
And on that very day, it may be, one of his aristocratic
disciples, high in the ranks of Mithra’s sacred guilds, was
attending a priestly college which was charged with the
guardianship of gross and savage rites running back to Evander,
or he was consulting a Jewish witch, or a Babylonian diviner,
on the meaning of some sinister omen, or he may have been
sending down into the arena, with cold proud satisfaction, a
band of gallant fighters from the Thames or the Danube, to
butcher one another for the pleasure of the rabble of Rome.
Mithra, the Unconquered, the god of many lands and dynasties
from the dawn of history, was a fascinating power. But, at his
best, he belonged to the order which was vanishing.
</p>

        </div></div></body>
        <back>
            <div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="627"/><anchor id="Pg627"/>
<index index="toc" level1="Index"/><index index="pdf" level1="Index"/>
<head>INDEX</head>

<list>
<item>Abascantus, secretary <hi rend="italic">ab epistulis</hi>, career of, described in the <hi rend="italic">Silvae</hi>, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref></item>

<item><hi rend="italic">Acta diurna</hi>,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>regular arrival of, in the provinces, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>;</item>
    <item>reader of, <ref target="Pg95">95</ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Acte, mistress of Nero, cares for his burial, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></item>

<item>Aelian of Praeneste,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>account of his work on Providence, <ref target="Pg456">456</ref>;</item>
    <item>immense credulity, and hatred of rationalism, <ref target="Pg456"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>the pious cock of Tanagra, <ref target="Pg457">457</ref>;</item>
<item>last dream of Philemon, <ref target="Pg457"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Africa,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>the development of its city life, organisation of Thamugadi, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>;</item>
    <item>of Lambesi, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>;</item>
<item>amphitheatres in, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>;</item>
<item>and bishoprics, <ref target="Pg201"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>little touched by Mithraism, <ref target="Pg597">597</ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Agrippina, mother of Nero,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>memoirs by, used by Tacitus, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>;</item>
    <item>sits on the tribunal with Claudius, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref>;</item>
<item>shade propitiated by Nero, <ref target="Pg491">491</ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Albinus, P. <anchor id="corr627"/><corr sic="Caeonius">Caeionius</corr>, restores a temple at Thamugadi, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref></item>

<item>Alcantara, the bridge of, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref></item>

<item>Alexander of Abonoteichos, 
<list rend="nested">
    <item>oracle on the Marcomannic war, <ref target="Pg451">451</ref>, <ref target="Pg476">476</ref>;</item>
    <item>physical and mental gifts of, <ref target="Pg473">473</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>skilful charlatanry, <ref target="Pg474">474</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>war with the Epicureans, <ref target="Pg476">476</ref>;</item>
<item>Lucian’s treatment of, <ref target="Pg477">477</ref>;</item>
<item>establishes new Mysteries, <ref target="Pg476">476</ref> sq.</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Alexandria,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>roses from, for Nero’s dinners, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
    <item>singing boys from, at Trimalchio’s dinner, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>character of its populace, <ref target="Pg374">374</ref>;</item>
<item>Dion Chrysostom rebukes their passion for games, <ref target="Pg374"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>a great focus of religious feeling, <ref target="Pg397">397</ref>;</item>
<item>and eclecticism, <ref target="Pg561">561</ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Animal-worship,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>excites ridicule, <ref target="Pg571">571</ref>;</item>
    <item>philosophy justified it, <ref target="Pg571"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>, <ref target="Pg395">395</ref>;</item>
<item>little noticed in Apuleius, <ref target="Pg572">572</ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Annaeus Serenus, Seneca’s <hi rend="italic">De Tranquillitate</hi> addressed to, character of, <ref target="Pg319">319</ref></item>

<item>Antinous, death and apotheosis of, <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>, <ref target="Pg477">477</ref>, <ref target="Pg478">478</ref></item>

<item>Antium, temple of Fortuna Primigenia at, <ref target="Pg456">456</ref></item>

<item>Antoninus Pius,
<list rend="nested">
    <item> builds a temple to Juno Sospita of Lanuvium, <ref target="Pg538">538</ref>;</item>
    <item>to Mithra at Ostia, <ref target="Pg591">591</ref>;</item>
<item>his country pleasures at Lorium, <ref target="Pg537">537</ref>;</item>
<item>flattered by the Arval Brothers, <ref target="Pg542">542</ref>;</item>
<item>Magna Mater on his coins, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>taurobolium for, in 160, <ref target="Pg549"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>, <ref target="Pg557">557</ref></item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Apollonius of Tyana,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>involved in political conspiracy, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>;</item>
    <item>a great preacher, effect of his sermons, <ref target="Pg347">347</ref>;</item>
<item>early life, Pythagorean asceticism, Sun worship, and catholic ritualism, <ref target="Pg399">399</ref>;</item>
<item>reconciled myth with a purer faith, <ref target="Pg400">400</ref>;</item>
<item>visits all the oracles, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref>;</item>
<item>his ideas of a future state, <ref target="Pg518">518</ref> sqq.</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Apotheosis,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>in the Antonine age, <ref target="Pg386">386</ref>, <ref target="Pg537">537</ref>;</item>
    <item>of Antinous, <ref target="Pg477">477</ref>;</item>
<item>of Peregrinus, <ref target="Pg478">478</ref>;</item>
<item>of M. Aurelius, <ref target="Pg478"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>of the Emperors, its history, <ref target="Pg615">615</ref> sqq.</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Apuleius,
<list rend="nested">
    <item>sensual imagination and mysticism of, <ref target="Pg389">389</ref>;</item>
    <item>weird scenes of miracle in Thessaly, <ref target="Pg483">483</ref>;</item>
<item>lofty conception of God, <ref target="Pg389">389</ref>;</item>
<item>description of the revels of the wandering priests of the Syrian goddess, <ref target="Pg551">551</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>of other scenes in Thessaly, <ref target="Pg552">552</ref>;</item>
<item>conception of Isis in the Metamorphoses, <ref target="Pg563">563</ref>;</item>
<item>mystic raptures, <ref target="Pg570">570</ref>, <ref target="Pg574">574</ref>, <ref target="Pg576">576</ref></item>
</list></item>

<item>Aquileia, a great seat of Mithraism, <ref target="Pg593">593</ref></item>

<item>Ardeliones, the, life of, described, <ref target="Pg12">12</ref>, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref></item>

<item>Aristides, P. Aelius,
<list rend="nested"><item>picture of the Roman Empire in, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>;</item>
<item>general security, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>;</item>
<item>journey from Mysia to Rome, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>, <ref target="Pg464">464</ref>;</item>
<item>early history and travels, <ref target="Pg457">457</ref>;</item>
<item>long ill health and resort to temples of healing, <ref target="Pg458">458</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>his rhetorical training affected his religious attitude, <ref target="Pg458">458</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>diseases of, lasting for thirteen years, <ref target="Pg463">463</ref>;</item>
<item>his ordeals and vitality, <ref target="Pg465">465</ref>;</item>
<item>visited by the gods, <ref target="Pg466">466</ref>;</item>
<item>recovers his rhetorical power, <ref target="Pg466"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>mingled vanity and piety of, <ref target="Pg467">467</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Aristotle, influence of,
<list rend="nested"><item>on Plutarch, <ref target="Pg412">412</ref>;</item>
<item>on Seneca, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>;</item>
<item>on Maximus of Tyre, <ref target="Pg421">421</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Army, the, 
<list rend="nested"><item>honesty and courage in, <ref target="Pg49">49</ref>;</item>
<item><hi rend="italic">castra stativa</hi> grow into towns, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>;</item>
<item>Septimius Severus allows the soldier <pb n="628"/><anchor id="Pg628"/>to live with his family, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>;</item>
<item>how pensions provided for, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>;</item>
<item>military colleges, their objects, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>;</item>
<item>the worship of Mithra propagated by, <ref target="Pg591">591</ref>;</item>
<item>the legions which were most active, <ref target="Pg595">595</ref>, <ref target="Pg596">596</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Arrius Antoninus, grandfather of Ant. Pius, Greek verses of, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref></item>

    <item>Art, 
    <list rend="nested"><item>pretence of taste for, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>;</item>
    <item>influence of, in religion discussed by Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>;</item>
<item>decay of, lamented by Petronius, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Artemidorus,
<list rend="nested"><item>work on Dreams by, <ref target="Pg468">468</ref>;</item>
<item>immense industry, collections, and faith in the science, <ref target="Pg468"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>contempt for impostors, <ref target="Pg469">469</ref>;</item>
<item>quasi scientific method, <ref target="Pg469"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>its absurdities, <ref target="Pg470">470</ref></item></list>
</item>

<item>Arvales Fratres, the College of,
<list rend="nested"><item>revived by Augustus, <ref target="Pg534">534</ref>;</item>
<item>early history, meetings and ritual of, <ref target="Pg540">540</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>servility to the Emperors, <ref target="Pg541">541</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Asclepius, 
<list rend="nested"><item>immense popularity of his worship, <ref target="Pg459">459</ref>, <ref target="Pg539">539</ref>;</item>
<item>temples of, and their routine and organisation, <ref target="Pg460">460</ref>;</item>
<item>new oracle of, at Abonoteichos, <ref target="Pg474">474</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Asiaticus, freedman of Vitellius, history of, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref></item>

<item>Astrology, 
<list rend="nested"><item>influence of, in the early empire, a political danger, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg447">447</ref>;</item>
<item>astrologers banished by Claudius, Vitellius and Vespasian, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref>;</item>
<item>a Greek trade, <ref target="Pg93">93</ref>;</item>
<item>Augustus burns books of, <ref target="Pg446">446</ref>;</item>
<item>Tiberius believes in, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref>;</item>
<item>Otho, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref>;</item>
<item>Titus, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref>;</item>
<item>and M. <anchor id="corr628"/><corr sic="Aurelius">Aurelius,</corr> <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>;</item>
<item>Domitian, <ref target="Pg450"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item><anchor id="corr628-2"/><corr sic="Hadrian">Hadrian,</corr> <ref target="Pg450"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>in Mithraism, <ref target="Pg598">598</ref>, <ref target="Pg602">602</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Attis, 
<list rend="nested"><item>legend of, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>becomes a solar deity, <ref target="Pg556">556</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Augury, 
<list rend="nested"><item>decay of, <ref target="Pg445">445</ref>;</item>
<item>abuse of, <ref target="Pg532">532</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Augustales, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>Trimalchio one of, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>;</item>
<item>importance, organisation, social rank, and insignia in municipal towns, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>;</item>
<item>generosity of, as patrons of colleges, <ref target="Pg275">275</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Augustine, S.,
<list rend="nested"><item>defends the Cynics of his time, <ref target="Pg352">352</ref>;</item>
<item>contempt for rites of Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg547">547</ref>;</item>
<item>on Varro’s theology, <ref target="Pg417">417</ref>, <ref target="Note531-3">531 n.</ref>;</item>
<item>on the cult of martyrs, <ref target="Pg488">488</ref>;</item>
<item>on Plato, <ref target="Pg523">523</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Augustus,
<list rend="nested"><item>his disguised power, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>;</item>
<item>destroys 2000 books of divination, <ref target="Pg446">446</ref>;</item>
<item>his horoscope cast, <ref target="Pg447">447</ref>;</item>
<item>his religious restoration, and its motive, <ref target="Pg533">533</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to foreign religions, <ref target="Pg533">533</ref>;</item>
<item>restores a temple of Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg548">548</ref>;</item>
<item>cautious acceptance of divine honours, <ref target="Pg615">615</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Aurelian,
<list rend="nested"><item>his temple of the Sun, <ref target="Pg586">586</ref>;</item>
<item>outbreak of the workmen of the Mint in his reign, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>;</item>
<item>legend <hi rend="italic">deo et domino nato</hi> on his coins, <ref target="Pg618">618</ref>;</item>
<item>effect of his Sun-worship on the development of imperial power, <ref target="Pg619">619</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Aurelius, M.,
<list rend="nested"><item>slight interest of, in speculation, <ref target="Pg339">339</ref>;</item>
<item>his tutors of various schools, <ref target="Pg343">343</ref>;</item>
<item>as a boy recites the Salian litany, <ref target="Pg385">385</ref>;</item>
<item>his gospel of renunciation, <ref target="Pg393">393</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>his conformity, <ref target="Pg394">394</ref>;</item>
<item>employs diviners, <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>;</item>
<item>relations of, with Galen, <ref target="Pg506">506</ref>;</item>
<item>views of, about immortality, <ref target="Pg507">507</ref>;</item>
<item>his Stoic ideal of life, <ref target="Pg509">509</ref>;</item>
<item>his sadness and its causes, <ref target="Pg510">510</ref>;</item>
<item>one of the Salii in his 8th year, <ref target="Pg535">535</ref>;</item>
<item>his religious conservatism, <ref target="Pg537">537</ref>;</item>
<item>images of, in every family in the West, <ref target="Pg616">616</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Balbilla, Greek verses by, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref></item>

<item>Birth,
<list rend="nested"><item>respect for, in Juvenal, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>;</item>
<item>in D. Cassius, Suetonius, and Pliny, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref>;</item>
<item>manufacture of genealogies, in Vit. Apollonius of Tyana, and S. Jerome, <ref target="Pg70"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>Herodes Atticus traced his descent from the Aeacidae, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>;</item>
<item>Tiberius on, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Bithynia,
<list rend="nested"><item>civic mismanagement in, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref>;</item>
<item>literary distinction of, <ref target="Pg372">372</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Boeotia, the oracles of, <ref target="Pg471">471</ref></item>

<item>Brescia, high moral tone of, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref></item>
</list><list>
<item>Caenis, concubine of Vespasian, influence and intrigues of, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></item>

<item>Caligula,
<list rend="nested"><item>wild schemes and profusion of, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>his cruelty and insolence to Senators, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>;</item>
<item>depraving example, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>;</item>
<item>consults the oracle of Fortune at Antium, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref>;</item>
<item>apparitions at his burial, <ref target="Pg490">490</ref>;</item>
<item>claims of divinity, <ref target="Pg615">615</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Calpurnia, Pliny’s wife,
<list rend="nested"><item>character of, and his love for her, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>;</item>
<item>literary taste of, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref></item></list></item>

<item><hi rend="italic">Canabae legionis</hi>, at Lambesi, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref></item>

<item>Canusium,
<list rend="nested"><item><hi rend="italic">Album</hi> of, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>;</item>
<item>Herodes Atticus gave an aqueduct to, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Captation,
<list rend="nested"><item>a regular profession, <ref target="Pg72">72</ref>;</item>
<item>result of plebeian poverty and aristocratic vice, <ref target="Pg96">96</ref>;</item>
<item>at Croton, in Petronius, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>;</item>
<item>Regulus a captator, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Carnuntum, in Pannonia,
<list rend="nested"><item>a seat of Mithraism from 70 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, <ref target="Pg591">591</ref>;</item>
<item>its temples, <ref target="Pg595">595</ref>;</item>
<item>temple restored at, by the imperial house, in the fourth century, <ref target="Pg619">619</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Centumviral court, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>picture of, in Pliny’s Letters, <ref target="Pg154">154</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>he welcomes young aristocrats to, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Chaeremon, Alexandrian librarian, wrote a treatise on Isis, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref></item>

<item>Charity, and munificence,
<list rend="nested"><item>provision for poor children by Trajan and later Emperors, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>;</item>
<item>private benevolence exemplified by Pliny, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>;</item>
<item>his benefactions, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>other examples in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>;</item>
<item>the Stertinii, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>;</item>
<item>Dion Chrysostom and <pb n="629"/><anchor id="Pg629"/>his father, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>;</item>
<item>Herodes Atticus, enormous benefactions of, <ref target="Pg225"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>munificence of the Emperors, Vespasian, Titus, Hadrian, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>;</item>
<item>private examples from inscriptions, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>;</item>
<item>ideals of the uses of wealth, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>;</item>
<item>men ruin themselves by generosity, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Cicero,
<list rend="nested"><item>adorned by Pliny, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</item>
<item>on augury, <ref target="Pg445">445</ref>;</item>
<item>on beneficence, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;</item>
<item>on superstition, <ref target="Pg443">443</ref>;</item>
<item>on legend, <ref target="Pg495">495</ref>;</item>
<item>on Delphi, <ref target="Pg471">471</ref>;</item>
<item>on immortality, <ref target="Pg488">488</ref></item></list></item>

<item>City life,
<list rend="nested"><item>splendour of, in the Antonine age, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref>;</item>
<item>weariness of life in the capital, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>;</item>
<item>growth of, in Gaul, Spain, Dacia, and Asia, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>

<item>Claudian,
<list rend="nested"><item>connects Mithra with Bel, <ref target="Pg588">588</ref>;</item>
<item>contempt for Greeks, <ref target="Pg90">90</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Claudius,
<list rend="nested"><item>recruits the Senate from the provinces, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>, <ref target="Pg72">72</ref>;</item>
<item>Hellenism of, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>;</item>
<item>his encouragement of trade, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>;</item>
<item>his effort to revive the art of augury, <ref target="Pg445">445</ref>;</item>
<item>banishes the astrologers, <ref target="Pg418">418</ref>;</item>
<item>conservative in religion, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
<item>persecutes the Jewish and Druidic religions, <ref target="Pg566">566</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Claudius Etruscus, career of, and duties as minister, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref></item>

<item>Clea, a priestess of Osiris at Delphi, <ref target="Pg424">424</ref></item>

<item>Client, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>in Juvenal, <ref target="Pg93">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg94">94</ref>;</item>
<item>change of the relation under the Empire, <ref target="Pg94"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>the relation in the colleges, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Clients,
<list rend="nested"><item>position in the time of Juvenal, <ref target="Pg93">93</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>and Martial, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Clodius, P., uses the colleges, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref></item>

<item>Colleges, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>plebeian class in towns, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>;</item>
<item>pride of free artisan class, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>;</item>
<item>early history of <hi rend="italic">Collegia</hi>, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref>;</item>
<item>danger from, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>;</item>
<item>restrained by law, <ref target="Pg255"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>an irresistible movement, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>;</item>
<item>wish for pious burial, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>;</item>
<item>evidence on, from inscriptions, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>;</item>
<item>funerary colleges authorised, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>;</item>
<item>consequences of the concession, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>;</item>
<item>College of Diana and Antinous, its organisation, fees, etc. <ref target="Pg260">260</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>College of Aesculapius and Hygia, its regulations, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>;</item>
<item>colleges founded on religion, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>;</item>
<item>industrial colleges, great fair at Cremona, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>;</item>
<item>wandering traders, <hi rend="italic">collegia peregrinorum</hi>, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</item>
<item>colleges at Lyons, Ostia, Arles, etc. <ref target="Pg265">265</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>objects of association, <ref target="Pg266">266</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>favoured by masters, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>;</item>
<item>colleges moulded on the model of the city, names of offices, etc. <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>;</item>
<item>gradation of rank in, its object, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>;</item>
<item>how the <hi rend="italic">schola</hi> was provided, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>;</item>
<item>associations gather round it, gifts made to it, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>;</item>
<item>College of Silvanus at Philippi, <ref target="Pg272"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>patrons of, and their <hi rend="italic">raison d’être</hi>, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>;</item>
<item>colleges and their patrons of very different rank, <ref target="Pg274">274</ref>;</item>
<item>election of a patron, <ref target="Pg274"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>colleges founded to guard a tomb, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>;</item>
<item>provisions for permanent observances, <ref target="Pg277">277</ref>;</item>
<item>college feasts and <hi rend="italic">sportulae</hi>, <ref target="Pg277">277</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>regulations for decorum in, fines, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>;</item>
<item>the college a family, in which the slave is an equal, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref>;</item>
<item>were colleges eleemosynary institutions? <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>;</item>
<item>military colleges of Lambesi, their organisation and objects, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>extinction of a college, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Commodus,
<list rend="nested"><item>takes the tonsure of Isis and walks in an Isiac procession, <ref target="Pg553">553</ref>;</item>
<item>assumes the <anchor id="corr629"/><corr sic="Mithriac">Mithraic</corr> title of <hi rend="italic">Invictus</hi>, <ref target="Pg618">618</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Como,
<list rend="nested"><item>Pliny’s estates at, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>;</item>
<item>his gifts to, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>;</item>
<item>a suicide at, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>;</item>
<item><hi rend="italic">honorarium</hi> of its curia, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Conversion,
<list rend="nested"><item>Seneca on, <ref target="Pg34">34</ref>;</item>
<item>result of the preaching of Apollonius, <ref target="Pg347">347</ref>;</item>
<item>conversion of Polemon, <ref target="Pg347"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>of D. Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg368">368</ref>;</item>
<item>in Plutarch, <ref target="Pg413">413</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Corellius Rufus, suicide of, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref></item>

<item>Cornelia, wife of Pompey, culture of, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref></item>

<item>Cotta, M. Aurelius, liberality of, to a freedman, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref></item>

<item>Country life,
<list rend="nested"><item>growing love of, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>;</item>
<item>Roman country seats, their sites and architecture, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref>;</item>
<item>extent and grounds, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>;</item>
<item>routine of life, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref>;</item>
<item>purchase and management of estates, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>;</item>
<item>charm of the country in Roman literature, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>;</item>
<item>yet contempt for it, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>;</item>
<item>moral tone of, <ref target="Pg2">2</ref>, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Cremona,
<list rend="nested"><item>great fair at, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>;</item>
<item>sack of, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>;</item>
<item>colleges of youth at, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</item>
<item>munificence of its citizens, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Curatores,
<list rend="nested"><item>heard of first in the reign of Trajan, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>;</item>
<item>control of municipal finance by, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Curia, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>composition of, illustrated by the roll of Canusium, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>;</item>
<item>numbers, and qualification of, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>;</item>
<item>its fate, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Cynics, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>met a general demand for moral guidance, <ref target="Pg340">340</ref>;</item>
<item>description of, in Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg349">349</ref>;</item>
<item>and in the literature of the age, <ref target="Pg350">350</ref> n.;</item>
<item>the Cynic in Lucian’s <hi rend="italic">Banquet</hi>, <ref target="Pg350"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>attractions of the life of, <ref target="Pg351">351</ref>;</item>
<item>gross charges against; S. Augustine’s testimony, <ref target="Pg352">352</ref>;</item>
<item>causes of prejudice against, <ref target="Pg352"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>death of Peregrinus as treated by Lucian, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>;</item>
<item>affinity of, with Christian asceticism, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>, <ref target="Pg361">361</ref>;</item>
<item>evidently a great popular force, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref>;</item>
<item>a one-sided Stoicism, <ref target="Pg359">359</ref>;</item>
<item>Cynic ideal, <ref target="Pg359">359</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>attitude to the Empire, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>and to popular religion, <ref target="Pg363">363</ref>;</item>
<item>cultivated Cynics, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>
</list><list>
<item>Dacia,
<list rend="nested"><item>organisation and town life of, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>;</item>
<item>worship of Magna Mater in, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>of Isis, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref>;</item>
<item>settlement of, by Trajan, a <pb n="630"/><anchor id="Pg630"/>seat of Mithraism, <ref target="Pg594">594</ref>;</item>
<item>of the worship of Isis and Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Daemons,
<list rend="nested"><item>conception of, in Plutarch and Maximus of Tyre, <ref target="Pg426">426</ref>;</item>
<item>history of, in Greek literature from Hesiod, <ref target="Pg427">427</ref>;</item>
<item>use of the idea by Platonists, <ref target="Pg425">425</ref>;</item>
<item>Xenocrates first taught the existence of evil daemons, <ref target="Pg431">431</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>employed by Plutarch to rehabilitate myth, <ref target="Pg432">432</ref>;</item>
<item>believed in by the Fathers, <ref target="Pg433">433</ref>;</item>
<item>a cause of oracular inspiration, <ref target="Pg437">437</ref>;</item>
<item>mortality of, <ref target="Pg426">426</ref>;</item>
<item>daemon of Socrates, <ref target="Pg438">438</ref>;</item>
<item>daemon a higher self, <ref target="Pg439">439</ref>;</item>
<item>daemonology an attempt to bridge the gulf between man and the Infinite Spirit, <ref target="Pg603">603</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Dea Dia, worship of, <ref target="Pg540">540</ref></item>

<item>Delation,
<list rend="nested"><item>history and causes of, <ref target="Pg35">35</ref>;</item>
<item>delators of every rank, <ref target="Pg35"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>attractions of, wealth gained by, <ref target="Pg36">36</ref>;</item>
<item>Regulus a delator, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>;</item>
<item>Silius Italicus, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;</item>
<item>under Domitian, <ref target="Pg35">35</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Delphi,
<list rend="nested"><item>temple of Osiris at, <ref target="Pg424">424</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch’s love of, <ref target="Pg403">403</ref>, <ref target="Pg435">435</ref>;</item>
<item>decay of, in first century, <ref target="Pg434">434</ref>;</item>
<item>revival of, <ref target="Pg435">435</ref>;</item>
<item>why oracles were given in prose, <ref target="Pg436">436</ref>;</item>
<item>sources of its inspiration, <ref target="Pg437">437</ref>;</item>
<item>Nero’s violence to, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref>;</item>
<item>Hadrian tested, <ref target="Pg472"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Demetrius, the Cynic,
<list rend="nested"><item>life of, <ref target="Pg361">361</ref>;</item>
<item>a cultivated ascetic, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref>;</item>
<item>knew Apollonius of Tyana, <ref target="Pg362"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to the Empire, beards Nero and Vespasian, <ref target="Pg362"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Demonax,
<list rend="nested"><item>attitude to popular religion, <ref target="Pg363">363</ref>;</item>
<item>origin, education, and philosophic tone of, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref>;</item>
<item>fashion of his life and teaching, <ref target="Pg365">365</ref>;</item>
<item>epigrams and sarcasms, <ref target="Pg365">365</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>his personal magnetism, and reverence for him after his death, <ref target="Pg366">366</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Dendrophori,
<list rend="nested"><item>dedications by, to Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg551">551</ref>;</item>
<item>at Lyons, <ref target="Pg557">557</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Dion Chrysostom,
<list rend="nested"><item>view of the Cynics, <ref target="Pg349">349</ref>;</item>
<item>early history, exile, conversion, and preaching of, <ref target="Pg367">367</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>orations of, <ref target="Pg368">368</ref>;</item>
<item>simple philosophy, and view of the time, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref>, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref>;</item>
<item>warning to Tarsus, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref>;</item>
<item>sermon at Olbia, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>picture of city life in Asia Minor, its vices and jealousies, <ref target="Pg372">372</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>gospel of social charity, <ref target="Pg373">373</ref>;</item>
<item>scorn for the Alexandrian character, <ref target="Pg374">374</ref>;</item>
<item>his prose idyll on virtuous rural life in Euboea, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>view of prostitution and slavery, <ref target="Pg376">376</ref>;</item>
<item>ideal of monarchy, parable of the Two Peaks, <ref target="Pg377">377</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>oration at Olympia, <ref target="Pg379">379</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>suggested by Olympian Zeus of Pheidias, <ref target="Pg380">380</ref>;</item>
<item>Dion’s discussion on natural theology and anthropomorphism, <ref target="Pg381">381</ref>;</item>
<item>makes Pheidias defend representation of the Infinite in human form, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>;</item>
<item>his Zeus a moral ideal and spiritual power, <ref target="Pg383">383</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Domitian,
<list rend="nested"><item>delators under, <ref target="Pg35">35</ref>;</item>
<item>his belief in astrology, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>;</item>
<item>secret of his reign, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>;</item>
<item>value of the authorities on, <ref target="Note52">52 n.</ref>;</item>
<item>good traits in his character, <ref target="Pg53">53</ref>;</item>
<item>his encouragement of literature and political merit, <ref target="Pg53"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>his Hellenism, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>;</item>
<item>a moral reformer, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>;</item>
<item>causes of his unpopularity, <ref target="Pg54">54</ref>;</item>
<item>contradictions in his character, <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>;</item>
<item>replenishes the treasury by confiscation, <ref target="Pg56">56</ref>;</item>
<item>his terror at the end, <ref target="Pg56">56</ref>, <ref target="Pg57">57</ref>, <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>;</item>
<item>his funereal banquet, <ref target="Pg57">57</ref>;</item>
<item>founds a quinquennial competition in literature, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;</item>
<item>his superstition, <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>;</item>
<item>a conservative in religion, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
<item>celebrated the Quinquatria of Minerva, <ref target="Pg538">538</ref>;</item>
<item>his victories, <ref target="Pg542">542</ref>;</item>
<item>escaped from the capital in the vestments of Isis in 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, <ref target="Pg567">567</ref>;</item>
<item>built a temple to Isis, <ref target="Pg567"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>first called <hi rend="italic">Dominus et Deus</hi>, <ref target="Pg615">615</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Dreams,
<list rend="nested"><item>in temples of healing, <ref target="Pg460">460</ref>;</item>
<item>dream-oracles, <ref target="Pg461">461</ref>;</item>
<item>prescriptions in, <ref target="Pg463">463</ref>, <ref target="Pg464">464</ref>;</item>
<item>treatise of Artemidorus on, <ref target="Pg467">467</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>his faith in, <ref target="Pg468">468</ref>;</item>
<item>his absurdities, <ref target="Pg470">470</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny on, <ref target="Pg452">452</ref>, <ref target="Pg490">490</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Education,
<list rend="nested"><item>Vespasian endows, <ref target="Pg148">148</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of Quintilian on, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny helps to endow a school at Como, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>;</item>
<item>culture in Asia Minor, <ref target="Pg372">372</ref>;</item>
<item>among freedmen, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Empire, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>its temptations, <ref target="Pg31">31</ref>;</item>
<item>the influence of the Emperor’s example illustrated, <ref target="Pg31">31</ref>;</item>
<item>how waste led to cruelty and confiscation, <ref target="Pg33">33</ref>;</item>
<item>the secret of the imperial terror, various theories, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>;</item>
<item>the ideal of the Empire, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg43">43</ref>;</item>
<item>constant danger from pretenders, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref>;</item>
<item>the fiction of Augustus, the Emperor’s real power, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>;</item>
<item>checks upon it, <ref target="Pg42">42</ref>;</item>
<item>its tolerance of municipal liberty, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Entellus, gardens of, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref></item>

<item>Epicharis, freedwoman, refuses to betray the Pisonian conspirators, <ref target="Pg47">47</ref></item>

<item>Epictetus,
<list rend="nested"><item>his ideal of the Cynic philosopher, <ref target="Pg359">359</ref>;</item>
<item>men the soldiers of God, <ref target="Pg393">393</ref>;</item>
<item>gospel of renunciation in, <ref target="Note393-5"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi> n. 5</ref>;</item>
<item>on augury and divination, <ref target="Pg455">455</ref>;</item>
<item>early history of, <ref target="Pg503">503</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to belief in immortality, <ref target="Pg504">504</ref>;</item>
<item>reference to female Platonists, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>;</item>
<item>preaching of gratitude and resignation, <ref target="Pg393">393</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Epicurus,
<list rend="nested"><item>Seneca quotes, and defends to Lucilius, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref>;</item>
<item>Aelian anathematises, <ref target="Pg456">456</ref>;</item>
<item>Epicureans at Abonoteichos oppose Alexander, <ref target="Pg476">476</ref>;</item>
<item>orders banquets to his shade, <ref target="Pg456">456</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of, in last age of Republic, <ref target="Pg530">530</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Epidaurus,
<list rend="nested"><item>temple of Asclepius at, <ref target="Pg462">462</ref>, <ref target="Pg539">539</ref>;</item>
<item>social life of the patients, <ref target="Pg463">463</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Equites,
<list rend="nested"><item>in provincial towns, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>;</item>
<item>freedmen raised to the rank of, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>;</item>
<item>Juvenal’s <pb n="631"/><anchor id="Pg631"/>contempt for, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref>;</item>
<item>general low estimate of, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>;</item>
<item>displace freedmen as imperial secretaries, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</item>
<item>employment by Vitellius, Domitian, Hadrian, and Antoninus Pius, <ref target="Pg107"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Espionage,
<list rend="nested"><item>under the Empire, <ref target="Pg34">34</ref>;</item>
<item>under Domitian, <ref target="Pg56">56</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Euboea, D. Chrysostom’s description of rural life in, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref></item>

<item>Euhemerus,
<list rend="nested"><item>translated by Ennius, <ref target="Pg530">530</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch on, <ref target="Pg425">425</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Euphrates,
<list rend="nested"><item>Pliny’s sketch of, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>;</item>
<item>suicide of, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Evil, Plutarch’s theory of, <ref target="Pg430">430</ref></item>

<item>Extravagance,
<list rend="nested"><item>of Nero, <ref target="Pg20">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>of Domitian, <ref target="Pg55">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg56">56</ref>;</item>
<item>of Vitellius, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>of Caligula, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>under the Republic, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Fannia, widow of Helvidius Priscus, Pliny’s admiration for, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref></item>

<item>Finance,
<list rend="nested"><item>profusion of Caligula, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>straits of Domitian, <ref target="Pg56">56</ref>;</item>
<item>economy of Vespasian, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>, <ref target="Pg148">148</ref>;</item>
<item>Nero’s waste and plunder, <ref target="Pg20">20</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>Nerva’s retrenchment, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>waste of Vitellius, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>finance of provincial towns, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref>, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Fortuna Augusti, <ref target="Pg618">618</ref></item>

<item>Freedmen, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>their rise a great movement, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>;</item>
<item>prejudice against, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>why it was natural, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>;</item>
<item>contempt of literary men for vulgar wealth, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>;</item>
<item>yet the rise of the freedmen a promising movement, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>;</item>
<item>rise of, in the imperial household, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>;</item>
<item>become great ministers, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</item>
<item>replaced gradually by Equites, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</item>
<item>early freedmen ministers worthy of their place, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</item>
<item>career of Claudius Etruscus and Abascantus, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>of Narcissus and Pallas, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>;</item>
<item>how their wealth was gained, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;</item>
<item>their politic splendour, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>;</item>
<item>romantic career of a freedman, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>;</item>
<item>yet freedmen despised and ostracised, <ref target="Pg113"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>sometimes made great marriages, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>;</item>
<item>doubtful position of women of this class, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>;</item>
<item>yet some had great influence, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>;</item>
<item>Panthea, mistress of L. Verus, picture of, by Lucian, <ref target="Pg115"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>lower freedmen in the imperial service, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>;</item>
<item>transition from slavery to freedom, how freedmen rose, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>-<ref target="Pg120">120</ref>;</item>
<item>grossness and ostentation of their wealthy class, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>

<item>Freedom and Necessity,
<list rend="nested"><item>Plutarch’s views of, <ref target="Pg412">412</ref>;</item>
<item>Seneca’s, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Gaius, on the law of Colleges, <ref target="Pg254">254</ref></item>

<item>Galen,
<list rend="nested"><item>early history and training of, <ref target="Pg505">505</ref>;</item>
<item>eclecticism of, <ref target="Pg505"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>views of immortality, <ref target="Pg505"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>relations with M. Aurelius, <ref target="Pg506">506</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Genii,
<list rend="nested"><item>invented for every corporation and scene in Roman life, <ref target="Pg386">386</ref>;</item>
<item>tales of, in Britain and on the Indian Ocean, <ref target="Pg420">420</ref>, <ref target="Pg426">426</ref>;</item>
<item>wide-spread cult of, <ref target="Pg479">479</ref> sq.</item></list></item>

<item>Gladiators,
<list rend="nested"><item>municipal shows of, in Petronius, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>;</item>
<item>Trajan provides 10,000 on his Dacian triumph, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>;</item>
<item>protests against, by Seneca and Demonax, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>;</item>
<item>schools of, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref>, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;</item>
<item>shows began in Campania, <ref target="Pg241"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>school of, at Pompeii, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>;</item>
<item>notices in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>;</item>
<item>enthusiasm for, <ref target="Pg238"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>shows in remote places, <ref target="Pg239">239</ref>;</item>
<item>after battle of Bedriacum, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>;</item>
<item>less popular in Greece, except at Corinth, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;</item>
<item>various cost of, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;</item>
<item>classes who furnished gladiators, attractions of the profession, <ref target="Pg242">242</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>organisation of a school; a college of gladiators, <ref target="Pg243">243</ref></item></list></item>

<item>God,
<list rend="nested"><item>new conceptions of, <ref target="Pg5">5</ref>;</item>
<item>in Seneca, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref>;</item>
<item>God of the Stoics, varying conceptions of, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>;</item>
<item>demand for a moral God, <ref target="Pg389">389</ref>;</item>
<item>Stoicism fades into Platonism, <ref target="Pg391">391</ref>;</item>
<item>the Stoic god has no claim to worship, <ref target="Pg391"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>vague higher conceptions of, <ref target="Pg396">396</ref>, <ref target="Pg603">603</ref>;</item>
<item>a transcendent Deity, <ref target="Pg397">397</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch’s highest idea of, <ref target="Pg418">418</ref>;</item>
<item>man’s relation to, according to Maximus of Tyre, <ref target="Pg421">421</ref>;</item>
<item>relation of, to daemons, <ref target="Pg425">425</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Hadrian,
<list rend="nested"><item>letter of, to Servianus, <ref target="Pg397">397</ref>;</item>
<item>tests the omniscience of Delphi, <ref target="Pg435">435</ref>;</item>
<item>dabbled in astrology, and other dark arts, <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>, <ref target="Pg503">503</ref>;</item>
<item>his love of travel, <ref target="Pg503">503</ref>;</item>
<item>his faint belief in immortality, <ref target="Pg503">503</ref>;</item>
<item>a sceptic, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
<item>the Canopus of, at his villa at Tibur, <ref target="Pg567">567</ref>;</item>
<item>conspiracy against, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>;</item>
<item>character of, <ref target="Pg503">503</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Hellenism,
<list rend="nested"><item>various aspects of, reaction against, from the times of the elder Cato, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>;</item>
<item>Hellenism of early Emperors, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>;</item>
<item>Roman prejudice against Greeks, <ref target="Pg90">90</ref>;</item>
<item>why Greeks succeeded under the Empire, <ref target="Pg91">91</ref>;</item>
<item>Greek <hi rend="italic">grammatici</hi>, <ref target="Pg91">91</ref>;</item>
<item>Greeks as doctors, <ref target="Pg92">92</ref>;</item>
<item>Greek parasites, <ref target="Pg93">93</ref>;</item>
<item>love of Greek in Pliny’s days, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref> sq.</item></list></item>

<item>Helvidius Priscus,
<list rend="nested"><item>violence of, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>;</item>
<item>flouts Vespasian, <ref target="Pg40"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Herculaneum,
<list rend="nested"><item>temple of Magna Mater at, <ref target="Pg548">548</ref>;</item>
<item>frescoes of, illustrating the worship of Isis, <ref target="Pg578">578</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Herodes Atticus,
<list rend="nested"><item>gifts of, to many communities, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>friend of Demonax and Plutarch, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref>, <ref target="Pg403">403</ref>;</item>
<item>on the uses of wealth, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>;</item>
<item>claimed descent from the Aeacidae, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Herodotus,
<list rend="nested"><item>identifies Greek and Egyptian deities, <ref target="Pg561">561</ref>;</item>
<item>on Mithra, <ref target="Pg589">589</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Hesiod, on daemons, <ref target="Pg427">427</ref></item>

<item>Holconii, the, of Pompeii, public honours and benefactions of, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></item>

<pb n="632"/><anchor id="Pg632"/>

<item>Horace,
<list rend="nested"><item>love of the country, and memories of Mount Vultur in, <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>;</item>
<item>journey to Brundisium, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>;</item>
<item>on beneficence, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Hortensius, Q.,
<list rend="nested"><item>luxury of, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>;</item>
<item>poverty of his descendants, <ref target="Pg71"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Icelus,
<list rend="nested"><item>raised to rank by Galba, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</item>
<item>journey of, to Spain, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Immortality,
<list rend="nested"><item>ideas of, depend on ideas of God, <ref target="Pg484">484</ref>;</item>
<item><q>We know not what we shall be,</q> <ref target="Pg485">485</ref>;</item>
<item>faith in the <hi rend="italic">Manes</hi>, <ref target="Pg486">486</ref>;</item>
<item>evidence of epitaphs on, <ref target="Pg487">487</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Lemures, <ref target="Pg488">488</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>the <hi rend="italic">Mundus</hi>, <ref target="Pg489">489</ref>;</item>
<item>mingled elements in Virgil’s Inferno, <ref target="Pg491">491</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Roman longing for posthumous sympathy, <ref target="Pg488">488</ref>;</item>
<item>Orphic and Pythagorean influences on Virgil, <ref target="Pg494">494</ref>;</item>
<item>evidence of inscriptions on belief in, <ref target="Pg496">496</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Epicurean negation of, <ref target="Pg498">498</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>philosophic opinion on, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Lucretius and Julius Caesar on, <ref target="Pg500">500</ref>, <ref target="Pg501">501</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude of Epictetus, <ref target="Pg504">504</ref>;</item>
<item>Galen’s ideas of, <ref target="Pg505">505</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>M. Aurelius on, <ref target="Pg507">507</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Seneca on, <ref target="Pg514">514</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>Apollonius of Tyana on, <ref target="Pg518">518</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>Plutarch on, <ref target="Pg521">521</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Platonic imagery of the future world, and its influence on Plutarch, <ref target="Pg523">523</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>belief in, fostered by Isiac worship, <ref target="Pg575">575</ref>, <ref target="Pg583">583</ref>;</item>
<item>and by Mithraism, <ref target="Pg609">609</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Inns, poor and disreputable, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref></item>

<item>Isis,
<list rend="nested"><item>prescriptions of, in dreams, <ref target="Pg461">461</ref>;</item>
<item>transformation of her worship by the Ptolemies, <ref target="Pg560">560</ref>;</item>
<item>at the Peiraeus, <ref target="Pg560"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>influence of Greek settlers in Egypt, and of Greek mysticism, <ref target="Pg561">561</ref>, <ref target="Pg563">563</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>lofty conception of, in Apuleius, <ref target="Pg563">563</ref>;</item>
<item>date of her introduction in Italy, <ref target="Pg563"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>power over women, <ref target="Pg565">565</ref>;</item>
<item>repeated persecution of her worshippers, first century, <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, <ref target="Pg565">565</ref>;</item>
<item>in the reign of Tiberius, <ref target="Pg566">566</ref>;</item>
<item>favoured by Otho and the Flavians, <ref target="Pg567">567</ref>;</item>
<item>Domitian builds a temple to, in 92 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, classes who propagated the worship of, <ref target="Pg567">567</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>spread through all Western Europe, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>secret of her fascination, <ref target="Pg569">569</ref>;</item>
<item>highest conception of, <ref target="Pg572">572</ref>;</item>
<item>a real spiritual power, <ref target="Pg574">574</ref>;</item>
<item>gives the hope of immortality, <ref target="Pg575">575</ref>;</item>
<item>impressive ritual of, <ref target="Pg576">576</ref>;</item>
<item>daily offices, <ref target="Pg577">577</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>her rites in frescoes of Herculaneum, <ref target="Pg578">578</ref>;</item>
<item>great festivals of, the procession to the shore described, <ref target="Pg578">578</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>her priesthood, including women, <ref target="Pg580">580</ref>, <ref target="Pg582">582</ref>;</item>
<item>sacred guilds, Isiaci, Pastophori, etc., <ref target="Pg581">581</ref>;</item>
<item>syncretism of her worship, <ref target="Pg581"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>her priesthood a separate caste, their presbyteries, and ascetic life, <ref target="Pg582">582</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Jerome, S.,
<list rend="nested"><item>account of the grades of initiation in Mithraism by, <ref target="Pg611">611</ref>;</item>
<item>genealogies in, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Jews,
<list rend="nested"><item>growing influence of, in the first century <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>;</item>
<item>especially under the Flavian dynasty, <ref target="Pg83">83</ref>;</item>
<item>spread of Jewish observances, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref>;</item>
<item>foster superstition, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Julian, his hatred of Oenomaus of Gadara, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref></item>

<item><hi rend="italic">Jumentarii</hi>, at the gates of towns, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref></item>

<item>Juvenal,
<list rend="nested"><item>his views of society compared with Tacitus, <ref target="Pg58">58</ref>;</item>
<item>social rank and early training of, <ref target="Pg59">59</ref>;</item>
<item>experience as a client, <ref target="Pg59"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>bitterness of, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>;</item>
<item>dates of his <hi rend="italic">Satires</hi>, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>;</item>
<item>he and Martial have a common stock of subjects, <ref target="Pg60">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>;</item>
<item>plebeian pride, and old Roman prejudice, combined with the moral feeling of a later age, <ref target="Pg63">63</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to religion, <ref target="Pg64">64</ref>;</item>
<item>extravagant pessimism, his ideal in the past, <ref target="Pg65">65</ref>;</item>
<item>great movements of society described by, and sometimes misunderstood, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>;</item>
<item>decay of the noble class described by, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>;</item>
<item>contempt for new men, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref>;</item>
<item>signs of aristocratic poverty, <ref target="Pg72">72</ref>;</item>
<item>his ideal of senatorial dignity, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>;</item>
<item>treatment of women in the Sixth Satire, its faults, <ref target="Pg76">76</ref>;</item>
<item>condemns mere eccentricities and even laudable tastes, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>;</item>
<item>distrusts growing culture of women, <ref target="Pg79">79</ref>, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>;</item>
<item>fighting a lost battle, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref>;</item>
<item>scorn for women’s devotion to eastern cults, <ref target="Pg82">82</ref>;</item>
<item>pessimism about women had some justification, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>his judgments must be taken with some reserve, <ref target="Pg87">87</ref>;</item>
<item>indignation at the invasion of the Greeks, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>;</item>
<item>humiliation of the client, <ref target="Pg93">93</ref>;</item>
<item>general poverty, <ref target="Pg95">95</ref>;</item>
<item>the cry of the poor, and Roman contempt for industry and trade, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>;</item>
<item>Juvenal compared with Pliny, as a painter of society, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Lambaesis,
<list rend="nested"><item>the camp at, how it grew into a <hi rend="italic">municipium</hi>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>;</item>
<item>military colleges at, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>;</item>
<item>temple of Isis at, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref>;</item>
<item>worship of Mithra at, <ref target="Pg595">595</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Lanuvium, college at, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref></item>

<item>Lemuria, the, described, <ref target="Pg489">489</ref></item>

<item>Libraries,
<list rend="nested"><item>restocked with MSS. by Domitian, <ref target="Pg53">53</ref>;</item>
<item>Trimalchio’s Greek and Latin libraries, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>;</item>
<item>rapid production of books, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Literature,
<list rend="nested"><item>in the Antonine age, <ref target="Pg3">3</ref>;</item>
<item>in Pliny’s days, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>;</item>
<item>literary amateurs abound, <ref target="Pg157"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s poetry, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>;</item>
<item>love of Cicero, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</item>
<item>the plague of readings, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>, <ref target="Pg172">172</ref>;</item>
<item>decadence of, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>;</item>
<item>Silius Italicus, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>composition in Greek, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>;</item>
<item>Titinius Capito, a historian, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>;</item>
<item>devotion to poetry, and its causes, influence of the Augustan tradition,
<pb n="633"/><anchor id="Pg633"/><ref target="Pg169">169</ref>;</item>
<item>fashion of the archaic style, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>;</item>
<item>Domitian founds a literary competition, its influence, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;</item>
<item>literary men generally born in provincial places, <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>;</item>
<item>Demonax rebukes literary archaism, <ref target="Pg367">367</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Livy,
<list rend="nested"><item>on decay of augury, <ref target="Pg445">445</ref>;</item>
<item>on the Bacchanalian scandal, <ref target="Pg563">563</ref>;</item>
<item>on the apocryphal books of Numa, <ref target="Pg564">564</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Lucan,
<list rend="nested"><item>on the worship of Isis, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref>;</item>
<item>betrays his mother, his death, <ref target="Pg471">471</ref>;</item>
<item>style of, referred to in the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> of Petronius, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Lucian,
<list rend="nested"><item>his war against the Cynics, <ref target="Pg337">337</ref>;</item>
<item>yet sometimes approaches their view of life, <ref target="Pg337">337</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>the <hi rend="italic">Charon</hi> of, <ref target="Pg338">338</ref>;</item>
<item>the <hi rend="italic">Hermotimus</hi> of, witnesses to a moral movement, <ref target="Pg341">341</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>the Cynic in his <hi rend="italic">Banquet</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">Fugitives</hi>, <ref target="Pg350">350</ref>;</item>
<item>his treatment of the character of Peregrinus, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>visit to Olympia at the time of the Cynic’s suicide, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>;</item>
<item>how he regarded it, and watched the growth of a myth, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>description of the new oracle of Abonoteichos, <ref target="Pg474">474</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>ridicule of superstition in the <hi rend="italic">Philopseudes</hi>, <ref target="Pg490">490</ref>;</item>
<item>reference to Mithra, <ref target="Pg590">590</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Lucretius,
<list rend="nested"><item>on immortality, <ref target="Pg500">500</ref>, <ref target="Pg501">501</ref>;</item>
<item>on Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg547">547</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Luxury,
<list rend="nested"><item>Juvenal’s view of, <ref target="Pg65">65</ref>;</item>
<item>Roman luxury in Republican times, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>;</item>
<item>luxury a relative term, <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>;</item>
<item>luxury of the Roman villa, chiefly in marbles, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>;</item>
<item>the luxury of travelling, progresses of Nero, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Maecenas,
<list rend="nested"><item>counsels of, to Augustus in Dion Cassius, <ref target="Pg446">446</ref>, <ref target="Pg533">533</ref>;</item>
<item>Trimalchio, a freedman of, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref> n.</item></list></item>

<item>Magna Mater,
<list rend="nested"><item>brought from Pessinus, 204 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, <ref target="Pg548">548</ref>;</item>
<item>no Roman priest of, for 100 years, <ref target="Pg548"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>growing popularity of, at Rome, in Spain and Dacia, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>legend of, <ref target="Pg549"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>her festival in spring, <ref target="Pg550">550</ref>;</item>
<item>her priests in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg550">550</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>her sacred colleges, <ref target="Pg551">551</ref>;</item>
<item>her disreputable followers in Apuleius, <ref target="Pg551"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>her worship transmuted, <ref target="Pg554">554</ref>;</item>
<item>the taurobolium and its history, <ref target="Pg556">556</ref>;</item>
<item>alliance of, with Mithra, and Attis, <ref target="Pg556">556</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>women admitted to sacred rank, <ref target="Pg557">557</ref>;</item>
<item>identified with Maia, Demeter, Bona Dea, etc., <ref target="Pg559">559</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Majesty, the law of, under the Empire, <ref target="Pg33">33</ref></item>

<item>Malaga, inscriptions of, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref></item>

<item>Manetho,
<list rend="nested"><item>treatise of, on myths, <ref target="Pg561">561</ref>;</item>
<item>assists the first Ptolemy in recasting Isiac worship, <ref target="Pg561"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Marcian, on Colleges, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref></item>

<item>Martial,
<list rend="nested"><item>deals with the same social subjects as Juvenal, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>;</item>
<item>his graphic picture of the age, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>;</item>
<item>better side of, love of country life, picture of the farm of Faustinus, love of Bilbilis, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>;</item>
<item>on Regulus, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>;</item>
<item>on literary amateurs, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>;</item>
<item>on Silius Italicus, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</item>
<item>relations of, with Pliny, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</item>
<item>regret for the capital, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Maximus of Tyre,
<list rend="nested"><item>character of his Discourses, <ref target="Pg349">349</ref>;</item>
<item>conciliation of anthropomorphism with a higher vision of God by, <ref target="Pg395">395</ref>;</item>
<item>ethical theory of, <ref target="Pg421">421</ref>;</item>
<item>daemonology of, <ref target="Pg429">429</ref>;</item>
<item>fortified by tales of apparitions, <ref target="Pg491">491</ref>;</item>
<item>influenced by Aristotle, <ref target="Pg421">421</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Medicine,
<list rend="nested"><item>profession of, filled by Greeks, <ref target="Pg92">92</ref>;</item>
<item>great physicians, Antonius Musa, the Stertinii, etc., <ref target="Pg92"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>sneers against, <ref target="Pg92"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>public physicians in municipal towns, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>;</item>
<item>income and munificence of the Stertinii, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>;</item>
<item>science of, in the second century, superstitious elements, <ref target="Pg459">459</ref>;</item>
<item>how blended with real skill, <ref target="Pg462">462</ref>;</item>
<item>skilled physicians in temples of Asclepius, <ref target="Pg465">465</ref></item></list></item>

<item><hi rend="italic">Medixtuticus</hi>, title of, still preserved in Oscan towns, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref></item>

<item>Minucius Felix,
<list rend="nested"><item>quoted, <ref target="Pg545">545</ref>;</item>
<item>on the festivals of Isis, <ref target="Pg578">578</ref> n.;</item>
<item>on daemons, <ref target="Pg433">433</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Miracles,
<list rend="nested"><item>Origen and Celsus on, <ref target="Pg481">481</ref>;</item>
<item>universal belief in, <ref target="Pg482">482</ref>;</item>
<item>miracles in temples of Serapis, <ref target="Pg573">573</ref>;</item>
<item>Vespasian consents to work, <ref target="Pg573"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Mithra,
<list rend="nested"><item>growing power of, <ref target="Pg386">386</ref>;</item>
<item>the taurobolium a part of his worship, <ref target="Pg556">556</ref>;</item>
<item>alliance of, with Magna Mater and Attis, <anchor id="corr633"/><ref target="Pg556"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref><corr sic="(missing)">,</corr> <ref target="Pg589">589</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>in the Vedas and Avestas, <ref target="Pg586">586</ref>;</item>
<item>in the Zoroastrian system, <ref target="Pg587">587</ref>;</item>
<item>the God of kings, <ref target="Pg587"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>influence of Babylon on the worship of, <ref target="Pg587">587</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of syncretism in Asia Minor on, <ref target="Pg588">588</ref>;</item>
<item>the taurobolium probably borrowed, <ref target="Pg588"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>origin of the Tauroctonus group, date of the introduction of the</item>
<item>cult into Europe, <ref target="Pg590">590</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch’s statement in the Life of Pompey, <ref target="Pg590"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>worship of, in the Flavian age, <ref target="Pg590"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>syncretism of, <ref target="Pg592">592</ref>;</item>
<item>worship of, propagated by soldiers, civil servants, etc., <ref target="Pg592"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>stages of its diffusion through Italy, <ref target="Pg593">593</ref>;</item>
<item>and north of the Alps, <ref target="Pg594">594</ref>;</item>
<item>progress of the worship along the Danube, <ref target="Pg594">594</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>legions which propagated it in Pannonia, <ref target="Pg595">595</ref>;</item>
<item>remains of, in Upper Germany, <ref target="Pg596">596</ref>;</item>
<item>in England, <ref target="Pg597">597</ref>;</item>
<item>in Gaul, <ref target="Pg597"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>its many attractions, <ref target="Pg597"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>Persian symbolism, <ref target="Pg598">598</ref>;</item>
<item>Babylonian elements in, astrology, <ref target="Pg598">598</ref>, <ref target="Pg602">602</ref>, sq.;</item>
<item>relative influence of Iran and Babylon, different views of, <ref target="Pg599">599</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of Platonism and Pythagoreanism on, <ref target="Pg600">600</ref>;</item>
<item>doctrine of the soul’s descent, <ref target="Pg600"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>cosmic theory, doctrine of emanation, and deification of elemental powers,
<anchor id="Pg634"/><ref target="Pg601">601</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Mithra as mediator in two senses, <ref target="Pg604">604</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>the Dadophori, <ref target="Pg604"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>, <ref target="Pg606">606</ref>;</item>
<item>the legend recovered from monuments, <ref target="Pg605">605</ref>;</item>
<item>the <hi rend="italic">petra genetrix</hi>, <ref target="Pg605"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>symbolism of the slaughtered bull, <ref target="Pg606">606</ref>;</item>
<item>agape of Mithra and Sun, <ref target="Pg607">607</ref>;</item>
<item>various interpretations of the legend, <ref target="Pg607">607</ref>;</item>
<item>Mithraism a religion of combat, <ref target="Pg608">608</ref>;</item>
<item>its consolations, <ref target="Pg608"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>its eschatology, <ref target="Pg609">609</ref>;</item>
<item>effect of the taurobolium, <ref target="Pg609"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>ritual and sacraments of, <ref target="Pg610">610</ref>;</item>
<item>daily offices, and festivals of, <ref target="Pg611">611</ref>;</item>
<item>seven grades of the initiated, <ref target="Pg611">611</ref>;</item>
<item>ordeals of, <ref target="Pg612">612</ref>;</item>
<item>guilds of, <ref target="Pg612">612</ref>;</item>
<item>rites regarded as a diabolic parody of the Church, <ref target="Pg613">613</ref>;</item>
<item>description of the chapels of, <ref target="Pg613"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref> sq.;</item>
<item>how Mithraism escaped persecution, <ref target="Pg614">614</ref>;</item>
<item>how it fostered theocratic ideas at Rome, <ref target="Pg617">617</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>a great imperial cult, <ref target="Pg619">619</ref>;</item>
<item>last days of, <ref target="Pg619"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>worship of, a great effort of syncretism, <ref target="Pg620">620</ref>;</item>
<item>moral and mystic strength of, <ref target="Pg621">621</ref>;</item>
<item>relations to Christianity, <ref target="Pg622">622</ref>;</item>
<item>similarities between them, <ref target="Pg623">623</ref>;</item>
<item>weaknesses of Mithraism, <ref target="Pg624">624</ref>;</item>
<item>inseparably involved with Nature-worship, <ref target="Pg626">626</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Monarchy,
<list rend="nested"><item>Seneca’s conception of, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>;</item>
<item>hereditary succession and adoption, <ref target="Pg27">27</ref>;</item>
<item>ideal of, in Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg377">377</ref>, sqq.;</item>
<item>apotheosis of, in third century, <ref target="Pg615">615</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>attitude of Tacitus to, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Morals,
<list rend="nested"><item>divorced from politics and speculation, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>became a religion in Seneca, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref>;</item>
<item>relation of precept and dogma, <ref target="Pg305"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>freedom and necessity, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>;</item>
<item>the fall of man, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch’s theory of, <ref target="Pg410">410</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>

<item>Municipal life,
<list rend="nested"><item>picture of, in Petronius, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>rapid organisation of, in Spain, Gaul, Dacia, etc., immense growth of towns, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>;</item>
<item>Baden in 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>;</item>
<item>Thamugadi in Numidia, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>;</item>
<item>policy of government towards provincial towns, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>;</item>
<item>drift towards uniformity of civic organisation, influence of the capital, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>;</item>
<item>how towns were formed, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>;</item>
<item>development from <hi rend="italic">castra stativa</hi>, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>, sq.;</item>
<item>soldiers allowed to live with their families in the third century, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref>;</item>
<item>municipal town aristocratic in constitution, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>;</item>
<item><hi rend="italic">Album Canusii</hi>, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>;</item>
<item>the <hi rend="italic">honestiores</hi>, <ref target="Pg210"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>popular election the rule in the first century, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>;</item>
<item>magistracies, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref>;</item>
<item>their burdens, signs of decay, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref>;</item>
<item>powers of the duumvirs, <ref target="Pg213">213</ref>;</item>
<item>the Curia, its numbers, qualification, and privileges, <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>;</item>
<item>local <hi rend="italic">Equites</hi>, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>;</item>
<item>Augustales, their importance, organisation, insignia, etc., <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>;</item>
<item>municipal finance, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref>;</item>
<item>public charges, food, education, medical attendance, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>;</item>
<item>public works, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref>;</item>
<item>finances, and maladministration of Bithynian towns in Trajan’s reign, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref>, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>;</item>
<item>municipal life of Pompeii, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, sqq.;</item>
<item>generous gifts to towns, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>;</item>
<item>examples from the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>public feasts on a great scale, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>;</item>
<item>gifts of money according to social rank, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>;</item>
<item>tone of town life, <ref target="Pg231">231</ref>;</item>
<item>pleasures of, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>;</item>
<item>gladiatorial shows, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>how the community rewarded benefactors, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>municipal meanness, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>;</item>
<item>decaying local patriotism, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch on, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref>;</item>
<item>growing centralisation and interference, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>;</item>
<item>shadows of the end, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Musonius,
<list rend="nested"><item>his ideal of chastity, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>;</item>
<item>condemns the Sophists, <ref target="Pg344">344</ref>;</item>
<item>exile of, under Nero; character of his teaching; preaches to the soldiery in 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, <ref target="Pg348">348</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Nature,
<list rend="nested"><item>love of, in Virgil, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>;</item>
<item>in Pliny, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>;</item>
<item>in Martial, <ref target="Pg174"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>, <ref target="Pg62">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Nero,
<list rend="nested"><item>hereditary taint of, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref>;</item>
<item>not without some good qualities, <ref target="Pg17">17</ref>;</item>
<item>could inspire affection, <ref target="Pg18">18</ref>;</item>
<item>his devotion to art, and its evil results, <ref target="Pg19">19</ref>;</item>
<item>a <hi rend="italic">cupitor incredibilium</hi>, <ref target="Pg20">20</ref>;</item>
<item>his waste leads to cruel oppression, <ref target="Pg20">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref>;</item>
<item>examples of wild profusion, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>his superstition, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
<item>compelled by the mob to recall Octavia, <ref target="Pg49">49</ref>;</item>
<item>popular indignation at his appearance on the stage, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>;</item>
<item>the <q>Noctes Neronis,</q> <ref target="Pg75">75</ref>;</item>
<item>his phil-Hellenism, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>;</item>
<item>silences Delphi, <ref target="Pg434">434</ref>;</item>
<item>belief in astrology, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref>;</item>
<item>propitiates his mother’s shade, <ref target="Pg491">491</ref>;</item>
<item>flattery of, by the Arval Brothers, <ref target="Pg542">542</ref>;</item>
<item>worshipped by Tiridates, <ref target="Pg617">617</ref>;</item>
<item>violence to Delphi, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Nerva,
<list rend="nested"><item>retrenchments of, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>first provided for poor children, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Nicomedia, D. Chrysostom on its public vices, <ref target="Pg373">373</ref></item>

<item>Numa, apocryphal books of, <ref target="Pg564">564</ref></item>

</list><list>

<item>Octavia, divorced on false charge, and recalled by Nero at the bidding of the mob, <ref target="Pg49">49</ref></item>

<item>Oenomaus of Gadara,
<list rend="nested"><item>rejection of myth and oracles by, <ref target="Pg363">363</ref>;</item>
<item>theory of oracles, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref>;</item>
<item>Julian’s denunciation of, <ref target="Pg364"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Olbia, D. Chrysostom’s visit to, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref> sq.</item>

<item>Oracles,
<list rend="nested"><item>decay of, <ref target="Pg434">434</ref>;</item>
<item>revival of, <ref target="Pg386">386</ref>;</item>
<item>theory of their inspiration, <ref target="Pg437">437</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>and of their cessation, <ref target="Pg437">437</ref>, <ref target="Pg471">471</ref>;</item>
<item>that of Abonoteichos defers to the older, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref>;</item>
<item>many oracles not silenced till the reign of Constantine, <ref target="Pg473">473</ref>;</item>
<item>how an oracle was worked, <ref target="Pg474">474</ref>;</item>
<item>oracles in Boeotia, <ref target="Pg471">471</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Orphic mysticism, the, <ref target="Pg427">427</ref>;
<list rend="nested">
<item>influence of, on Virgil, <ref target="Pg494">494</ref>;</item>
<item>on Mithraism, <ref target="Pg600">600</ref>;</item>
<item>on belief in immortality, <ref target="Pg516">516</ref></item></list></item>

<pb n="635"/><anchor id="Pg635"/>

<item>Osterburken, remains of Mithra worship at, <ref target="Pg596">596</ref></item>

<item>Ostia,
<list rend="nested"><item>colleges at, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>;</item>
<item>cult of Mithra at, <ref target="Pg591">591</ref>;</item>
<item>temple of Magna Mater at, <ref target="Pg591"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Otho,
<list rend="nested"><item>extravagance of, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
<item>his belief in astrology, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref>;</item>
<item>devotion of soldiers to, <ref target="Pg50">50</ref>;</item>
<item>his end, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref>;</item>
<item>flattered by the Arval Brotherhood, <ref target="Pg541">541</ref>;</item>
<item>the first Emperor who took part in Isiac worship, <ref target="Pg566">566</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Ovid,
<list rend="nested"><item>his ideal of womanhood, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref>;</item>
<item>shocked by the influence of the theatre on women, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to religion, <ref target="Pg532">532</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Pallas, power and insolence of, receives the adulation of the Senate, his wealth, and his end, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref></item>

<item>Panaetius and the Scipionic circle, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>;
<list rend="nested">
<item>modification of Stoicism by, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>;</item>
<item>abandons belief in immortality, <ref target="Pg500">500</ref>;</item>
<item>rejects divination, <ref target="Pg530">530</ref>;</item>
<item>little sympathy with popular religion, <ref target="Pg531">531</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Panthea, mistress of L. Verus, charms of, described by Lucian, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref></item>

<item>Paphlagonia, superstition of, <ref target="Pg474">474</ref></item>

<item>Pastophori of Isis, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>recognised by Sulla, <ref target="Pg565">565</ref>;</item>
<item>scribe of, <ref target="Pg570">570</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Peregrinus,
<list rend="nested"><item>early history of, connection with the Christians, and self-immolation, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref>;</item>
<item>Lucian’s attacks on his character, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref>;</item>
<item>assumes that the motive of Peregrinus was notoriety, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>;</item>
<item>Peregrinus influenced by eastern mysticism, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>;</item>
<item>character of, in Aulus Gellius, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Pessimism,
<list rend="nested"><item>of Seneca, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg303">303</ref>, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref>;</item>
<item>of Tacitus, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>;</item>
<item>Juvenal, <ref target="Pg65">65</ref>;</item>
<item>M. Aurelius, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>, <ref target="Pg335">335</ref>;</item>
<item>of the Greek poets, <ref target="Pg416">416</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Petronius,
<list rend="nested"><item>shared in the <q>Noctes Neronis,</q> <ref target="Pg75">75</ref>;</item>
<item>various opinions as to the date and object of his <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi>, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>;</item>
<item>motive of the work, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>;</item>
<item>the Petronius of Tacitus, his character and his end; the <hi rend="italic">Satiricon</hi> only a fragment, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>;</item>
<item>not without a higher moral tone, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>;</item>
<item>originality of Petronius, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>;</item>
<item>the scene and the characters, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Philosophy,
<list rend="nested"><item>power of, in government, <ref target="Pg6">6</ref>;</item>
<item>Stoic opposition in the first century, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>was it ever a dangerous force? <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>;</item>
<item>new ideals of humanity, <ref target="Pg63">63</ref>;</item>
<item>elevating influence of, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;</item>
<item>change in the conception of, in the first century, <ref target="Pg289">289</ref>;</item>
<item>practical interest in predominant, causes of the change, <ref target="Pg339">339</ref>, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>eclecticism and scepticism in, <ref target="Pg290"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>, <ref target="Pg412">412</ref>;</item>
<item>necessity for moral reform, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>;</item>
<item>private direction of souls, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>;</item>
<item>directors in great houses, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref>;</item>
<item>the philosopher a <hi rend="italic">generis humani paedagogus</hi>, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>;</item>
<item>modifications of Stoicism in Seneca, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref> sqq., <ref target="Pg306">306</ref>;</item>
<item><q>nulla virtus sine philosophia,</q> <ref target="Pg341">341</ref>;</item>
<item>eclecticism, <ref target="Pg343">343</ref>;</item>
<item>the Cynic opposition, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>eclecticism of Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg368">368</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>need of a philosophic théodicée, <ref target="Pg384">384</ref>;</item>
<item>effort of, to rehabilitate myth, <ref target="Pg432">432</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Pheidias,
<list rend="nested"><item>the Olympian Zeus of, <ref target="Pg380">380</ref>;</item>
<item>his defence of anthropomorphism in D. Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Pisa, disturbance at elections in, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref></item>

<item>Piso, the conspiracy of, <ref target="Pg47">47</ref> sq.</item>

<item>Platonism,
<list rend="nested"><item>few adherents of, in the first century, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>;</item>
<item>affected Panaetius, <ref target="Pg408"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>and Seneca, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>;</item>
<item>and Plutarch, <ref target="Pg409">409</ref>;</item>
<item>its daemonology, <ref target="Pg430">430</ref>;</item>
<item>encouraged belief in immortality, <ref target="Pg501">501</ref>;</item>
<item>visionary power of the great Master, <ref target="Pg523">523</ref>;</item>
<item>influence on Mithraism, <ref target="Pg600">600</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Plebeian life,
<list rend="nested"><item>picture of, in Petronius, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref> sq., <ref target="Pg271">271</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Pliny, the elder,
<list rend="nested"><item>on Roman luxury, <ref target="Pg67">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg68">68</ref>;</item>
<item>care of his nephew, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>;</item>
<item>life, character, and prodigious industry of, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>;</item>
<item>scorn for popular religion, <ref target="Pg535">535</ref>;</item>
<item>superstition of, <ref target="Pg451">451</ref>;</item>
<item>rejection of immortality, <ref target="Pg502">502</ref>;</item>
<item>on town life in Spain and Gaul, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>description of baths of Posides, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>;</item>
<item>on the Stertinii, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Pliny, the younger,
<list rend="nested"><item>ideal of the principate in the <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi>, <ref target="Pg43">43</ref>;</item>
<item>compared with Juvenal as a painter of society, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref>;</item>
<item>idealised his circle, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;</item>
<item>his blameless aristocrats, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>;</item>
<item>early life of, influence of Quintilian on, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>;</item>
<item>student friends, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref>;</item>
<item>admiration of the Stoic circle, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>;</item>
<item>military service, and entrance on forensic work, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>the Centumviral court, <ref target="Pg154">154</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>sketch of Regulus, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>passion for fame, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>;</item>
<item>literary amateurs, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>;</item>
<item>befriends Martial, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</item>
<item>admiration for Cicero, and for Greece, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>;</item>
<item>his loose verses, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>;</item>
<item>ideas of oratory, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>;</item>
<item>value of his Letters, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>;</item>
<item>imitated in fourth century, <ref target="Pg163"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>their principle of arrangement, and date, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>;</item>
<item>his devotion to literature, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;</item>
<item>admiration for Tacitus, <ref target="Pg164"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>his judgment of Silius Italicus, <ref target="Pg164"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>theory of life, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>;</item>
<item>literary coteries, Greek verse writing, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>;</item>
<item>writers of history, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>;</item>
<item>literary competitions, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref>;</item>
<item>the plague of recitations; Pliny gives readings himself, and punctually attends them: his estimate of their value, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>;</item>
<item>weariness of the capital and love of the country, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>;</item>
<item>not a sportsman, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>;</item>
<item>pictures of Roman country seats, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>;</item>
<item>routine of country life, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref>;</item>
<item>management of
<pb n="636"/><anchor id="Pg636"/>rural estates, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s kindness to slaves and dependents, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>;</item>
<item>view of suicide, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>;</item>
<item>Corellius Rufus, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s belief in the solidarity of rank, and the duty of mutual support, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>;</item>
<item>his superstition, <ref target="Pg452">452</ref>, <ref target="Pg490">490</ref>;</item>
<item>delight in helping young men of the upper class, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>;</item>
<item>love for Calpurnia, and ideal of girlhood, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>;</item>
<item>last glimpse of Pliny and Calpurnia, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>;</item>
<item>he represents the finest moral tone of the age, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;</item>
<item>his many benefactions and their amount, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Plutarch,
<list rend="nested"><item>on the duties of municipal life, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref>;</item>
<item>early history of, <ref target="Pg401">401</ref>;</item>
<item>friends of, at Rome, <ref target="Pg402">402</ref>;</item>
<item>love of Chaeronea, and Delphi, <ref target="Pg403">403</ref>;</item>
<item>visits to other parts of Greece, <ref target="Pg403">403</ref>;</item>
<item>table talk of, <ref target="Pg404">404</ref>;</item>
<item>his historic power, <ref target="Pg406">406</ref>;</item>
<item>ethical motive in, predominant, <ref target="Pg405">405</ref>;</item>
<item>admiration for Plato, <ref target="Pg409">409</ref>;</item>
<item>eclecticism, <ref target="Pg409"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>attacks Stoic psychology, <ref target="Pg410">410</ref>;</item>
<item>adopts some Aristotelian principles, <ref target="Pg412">412</ref>;</item>
<item>yet has many Stoic elements, <ref target="Pg414">414</ref>;</item>
<item>his treatment of Fate and free-will, <ref target="Pg412">412</ref>;</item>
<item>ideal of moral teaching, <ref target="Pg413">413</ref>;</item>
<item>conception of theology, <ref target="Pg417">417</ref>;</item>
<item>idea of God, <ref target="Pg418">418</ref>;</item>
<item>of matter and evil, <ref target="Pg419">419</ref>;</item>
<item>treatment of myth and religious symbol, <ref target="Pg423">423</ref>;</item>
<item>daemonology, <ref target="Pg430">430</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>used to rehabilitate myth, <ref target="Pg432">432</ref>;</item>
<item>interest in Delphi, <ref target="Pg435">435</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>theory of inspiration, <ref target="Pg439">439</ref>;</item>
<item>on the future state, <ref target="Pg496">496</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>on comfort in the Mysteries, <ref target="Pg516">516</ref>;</item>
<item>Consolation to his wife on the death of their daughter, <ref target="Pg520">520</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>arguments for immortality, <ref target="Pg521">521</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>visions of the future world, <ref target="Pg523">523</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>reference to Mithra as a mediator, <ref target="Pg590">590</ref>;</item>
<item>on the first appearance of Mithraism in Europe, <ref target="Pg590">590</ref>;</item>
<item>tales of ghosts at Chaeronea, <ref target="Pg490">490</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Politta, wife of Rubellius Plautus, courage and devotion of, <ref target="Pg49">49</ref></item>

<item>Polybius, freedman minister of Claudius, life of, described by Seneca, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref></item>

<item>Polybius, the historian, his attitude to Roman religion, <ref target="Pg531">531</ref></item>

<item>Pompeii,
<list rend="nested"><item>situation and various industries of, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>;</item>
<item>family of the Holconii, Eumachia, their gifts to the town, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>;</item>
<item>amphitheatre and temple of Isis at, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>, <ref target="Pg563">563</ref>;</item>
<item>election placards at, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>;</item>
<item>tombs of Alexandrian traders at, <ref target="Pg567">567</ref>;</item>
<item>colleges of <q>late sleepers</q> and <q>late drinkers</q> at, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Pontifex Maximus, the, <ref target="Pg534">534</ref>;
<list rend="nested">
<item>office held by the Emperors, its power, <ref target="Pg535">535</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Poppaea, her sympathy with Judaism, <ref target="Pg83">83</ref></item>

<item>Post, the public,
<list rend="nested"><item>organisation of, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s use of, for Calpurnia, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Poverty,
<list rend="nested"><item>contempt for, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>;</item>
<item>common in Juvenal’s time, <ref target="Pg94">94</ref>;</item>
<item>D. Chrysostom on, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Prayer,
<list rend="nested"><item>an effort of adoration, <ref target="Pg394">394</ref>;</item>
<item>a colloquy with God, <ref target="Pg420">420</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Preachers, the philosophic,
<list rend="nested"><item>Apollonius, <ref target="Pg347">347</ref>;</item>
<item>Musonius, <ref target="Pg348">348</ref>;</item>
<item>Maximus of Tyre, <ref target="Pg349">349</ref>;</item>
<item>Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>

<item>Prudentius, description of the taurobolium by, <ref target="Pg558">558</ref></item>

<item>Public works,
<list rend="nested"><item>mismanagement of, in Bithynia, <ref target="Pg220">220</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>curator of, <ref target="Pg220"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>undertaken by private persons, evidence of inscriptions on, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref> sq.</item></list></item>

<item>Pythagoreanism,
<list rend="nested"><item>not extinct in the first century <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, <ref target="Pg398">398</ref>;</item>
<item>daemonology of, <ref target="Pg428">428</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of, on Virgil, <ref target="Pg493">493</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>on Seneca, <ref target="Pg515">515</ref>;</item>
<item>connection with the Mysteries, <ref target="Pg516">516</ref>;</item>
<item>spiritual influence of, <ref target="Pg517">517</ref>;</item>
<item>influence on the mythology of Egypt, <ref target="Pg562">562</ref>;</item>
<item>and on Mithraism, <ref target="Pg600">600</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Quintilian,
<list rend="nested"><item>career of, as a teacher, and high moral influence, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>;</item>
<item>treats immortality as an open question, <ref target="Pg502">502</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Readings,
<list rend="nested"><item>the plague of, in Juvenal, <ref target="Pg59">59</ref>, <ref target="Pg95">95</ref>;</item>
<item>in Pliny, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>;</item>
<item>in Martial, <ref target="Pg61">61</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Regulus, M. Aquilius,
<list rend="nested"><item>career of, as delator, <ref target="Pg37">37</ref>;</item>
<item>as pleader, his wealth, and eccentricities, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Religion, old Roman,
<list rend="nested"><item>decay of, from the second Punic War, <ref target="Pg529">529</ref>;</item>
<item>its causes, <ref target="Pg530">530</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to, of Varro, Panaetius, Polybius, <ref target="Pg531">531</ref>;</item>
<item>Augustan restoration of, <ref target="Pg533">533</ref>;</item>
<item>conservative influence of the chief pontificate, <ref target="Pg535">535</ref>;</item>
<item>early emperors continue the Augustan policy, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
<item>reverence for the oldest Latin deities in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg538">538</ref>;</item>
<item>Jupiter, <ref target="Pg543">543</ref>;</item>
<item>Hercules, Silvanus, and the Nymphs, <ref target="Pg539">539</ref>;</item>
<item>revival of the Arval Brotherhood, <ref target="Pg540">540</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>feeling of the educated to, <ref target="Pg544">544</ref>;</item>
<item>real strength of, <ref target="Pg545">545</ref>;</item>
<item>last champions of, in the fourth century, <ref target="Pg546">546</ref>;</item>
<item>its formalism compared with the eastern worships, <ref target="Pg554">554</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Scepticism,
<list rend="nested"><item>from the second Punic War, <ref target="Pg530">530</ref>;</item>
<item>the scepticism of the elder Pliny, Seneca, Juvenal, etc., <ref target="Pg535">535</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Seleucus, an astrologer of Otho, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref></item>

<item>Senate, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>prestige and ancient claims of, <ref target="Pg38">38</ref>;</item>
<item>hated and feared by bad princes, <ref target="Pg38">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref>;</item>
<item>respect for, under good Emperors, <ref target="Pg39">39</ref>;</item>
<item>theoretical position of, under the Empire, <ref target="Pg41">41</ref>, <ref target="Pg42">42</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi> throws light on, <ref target="Pg44">44</ref>;</item>
<item>moral degradation of, shown in 69 <hi rend="small">A.D.</hi>, <ref target="Pg50">50</ref>;</item>
<item>poverty of many great houses, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>;</item>
<item>insults heaped on, by Emperors, <ref target="Pg51">51</ref>;</item>
<item>reduction of its numbers by massacre
<pb n="637"/><anchor id="Pg637"/>etc., <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>;</item>
<item>great families pensioned by Emperors, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>;</item>
<item>Senators compelled to act and fight as gladiators, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg74">74</ref>;</item>
<item>scorn of, for freedmen, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>;</item>
<item>frivolity of, in Pliny’s time, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;</item>
<item>senatorial life in the country, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref> sqq.</item></list></item>

<item>Seneca,
<list rend="nested"><item>his experience of the tyranny, <ref target="Pg7">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg8">8</ref>;</item>
<item>sad close of his life, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>;</item>
<item>knowledge of character, how acquired, <ref target="Pg9">9</ref>;</item>
<item>conception of the state of nature, and pessimism of, <ref target="Pg10">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>, <ref target="Pg14">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref>;</item>
<item>ghastly picture of high society, <ref target="Pg11">11</ref>;</item>
<item>of slavery, <ref target="Pg12">12</ref>, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>;</item>
<item>his terrors, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to philosophic revolutionaries, <ref target="Pg15">15</ref>;</item>
<item>conception of imperial power, <ref target="Pg16">16</ref>;</item>
<item>ideal of female character and capacity, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>;</item>
<item>anticipates the movement of the Antonine age, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;</item>
<item>as a spiritual director, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref>;</item>
<item>his undoubted power, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>;</item>
<item>his experience prepared him for the work, <ref target="Pg296">296</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>his court-life and wealth, <ref target="Pg296"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>contrasts in, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>;</item>
<item>calumnies against, <ref target="Pg298">298</ref>;</item>
<item>conception of the great office of philosophy, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to liberal studies, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>;</item>
<item>treatment of Physics, the moral effects and lessons of the study, <ref target="Pg301">301</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>intense earnestness of, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>;</item>
<item>defends and quotes Epicurus, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref>;</item>
<item>yet often a Stoic dogmatist, <ref target="Pg306"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>conception of God, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>, <ref target="Pg390">390</ref>;</item>
<item>influenced by Platonism, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>;</item>
<item>his psychology, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>necessity and conversion, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>;</item>
<item>the fall of man, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>;</item>
<item>Aristotelian elements in, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>humility of, <ref target="Pg316">316</ref>;</item>
<item>his disciples of the upper class, <ref target="Pg317">317</ref>;</item>
<item>on philosophic retreat, <ref target="Pg318">318</ref>;</item>
<item>his precepts for moral growth, <ref target="Pg320">320</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>death a mere bugbear, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref>;</item>
<item>attitude to myth, <ref target="Pg322"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>on public duty, <ref target="Pg325">325</ref>;</item>
<item>on the social instinct, kindness, forgiveness, etc., <ref target="Pg327">327</ref>;</item>
<item>his ideal of womanhood, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>;</item>
<item>Seneca and Thomas à Kempis, <ref target="Pg331">331</ref>;</item>
<item>his view of immortality approaches the Christian, <ref target="Pg5">5</ref>, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>Pythagorean influences on, <ref target="Pg515">515</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Sentinum, college of Mithra at, <ref target="Pg593">593</ref></item>

<item>Serapis,
<list rend="nested"><item>his temple of healing at Canopus, <ref target="Pg461">461</ref>;</item>
<item>his origin, various theories of, <ref target="Pg561">561</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>linked with Jupiter in the inscriptions, <ref target="Pg562">562</ref>;</item>
<item>lofty conception of, in Aristides, <ref target="Pg572">572</ref>, <ref target="Pg574">574</ref>;</item>
<item>miracles in his temples, <ref target="Pg573">573</ref>;</item>
<item>a guide and judge of souls, <ref target="Pg575">575</ref>;</item>
<item>his boundless sway, <ref target="Pg583">583</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Sidonius Apollinaris,
<list rend="nested"><item>imitation of Pliny’s Letters in, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>refers to Sulpicia, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>;</item>
<item>to Petronius, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Silius Italicus,
<list rend="nested"><item>Pliny’s estimate of, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>;</item>
<item>career and tastes of, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>;</item>
<item>a connoisseur, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>;</item>
<item>suicide of, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Slavery,
<list rend="nested"><item>moral and political effects of, according to Seneca, <ref target="Pg12">12</ref>;</item>
<item>courage of Octavia’s slave girls, <ref target="Pg48">48</ref>;</item>
<item>transition from slavery to freedom, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>kindly feeling, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>;</item>
<item>manumission, how obtained, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>;</item>
<item>growing <hi rend="italic">peculium</hi> of trusted slaves, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>;</item>
<item>tie between patron and freedman, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>;</item>
<item>duties and generosity of patrons, <ref target="Pg119"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>rise of the freedmen, <ref target="Pg119"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s kindness to slaves, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>;</item>
<item>harsh masters and their perils, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref>;</item>
<item>slave class dwindling, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref>;</item>
<item>slaves in the colleges, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Society,
<list rend="nested"><item><hi rend="italic">circuli</hi>, <ref target="Pg13">13</ref>;</item>
<item>gossip, <ref target="Pg33">33</ref>;</item>
<item>extravagant luxury, <ref target="Pg66">66</ref>;</item>
<item>respect for birth and manufacture of genealogies, <ref target="Pg69">69</ref>, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref>;</item>
<item>poverty and mendicancy of great houses, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>, <ref target="Pg72">72</ref>;</item>
<item>wider interests among women <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>;</item>
<item>culture of Roman women from Cornelia to Serena, wife of Stilicho, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>;</item>
<item>dangerous temptations of women’s life, <ref target="Pg85">85</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>general poverty under the Empire, <ref target="Pg94">94</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>mean trades more lucrative than cultivated professions, <ref target="Pg95">95</ref>;</item>
<item>society materialised, <ref target="Pg95"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>contempt for poverty, <ref target="Pg97">97</ref>;</item>
<item>grossness of freedmen, <ref target="Pg132">132</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>a sounder class in the worst days, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>;</item>
<item>wholesome force of Roman tradition, and country life, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>;</item>
<item>old-fashioned retreats of virtue, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>;</item>
<item>love of country life, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>;</item>
<item>suicide, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>;</item>
<item>wedded life of Calpurnia and Pliny, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>new moral ideals in Seneca, Juvenal, and Pliny, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>;</item>
<item>duties of wealth, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>;</item>
<item>public spirit of the age, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>;</item>
<item>rage for amusement, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>municipal gratitude and meanness, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>;</item>
<item>need of association in clubs, etc., <ref target="Pg256">256</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>immense force of the movement, <ref target="Pg266">266</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>ennui and self-abandonment of upper class, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>, <ref target="Pg319">319</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>need for popular evangelism, how the Cynics supplied it, <ref target="Pg335">335</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Socrates, theories of his daemon, <ref target="Pg438">438</ref></item>

<item>Sophists, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>influence of, <ref target="Pg4">4</ref>;</item>
<item>frivolous subjects and showy style of, condemned by philosophers, <ref target="Pg344">344</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch’s opinion of, <ref target="Pg413">413</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Sotion, trains Seneca in Pythagorean asceticism, <ref target="Pg296">296</ref></item>

<item>Spain,
<list rend="nested"><item>growth of towns in, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref>;</item>
<item>journey of Icelus in, to reach Galba, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>;</item>
<item>little affected by Mithraism, <ref target="Pg597">597</ref>;</item>
<item>worship of Isis in, <ref target="Pg567">567</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Spectacles, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>Senators descend into the arena, <ref target="Pg73">73</ref>;</item>
<item>women present at, mingling with men at the Circus, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref>;</item>
<item>obscenities of the theatre, <ref target="Pg86"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>number of days in the year given to, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>;</item>
<item>scene in Flavian Amphitheatre, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Spurinna, Vestricius,
<list rend="nested"><item>a verse writer, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>;</item>
<item>his orderly life a type, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Statius,
<list rend="nested"><item>his sketches of the great imperial freedmen, <ref target="Pg109">109</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>of the villas of
<pb n="638"/><anchor id="Pg638"/>Manlius Vopiscus, and Pollius Felix, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref>;</item>
<item>reference to Mithra in the <hi rend="italic">Thebaid</hi>, <ref target="Pg589">589</ref> sq.</item></list></item>

<item>Stoicism,
<list rend="nested"><item>the God of, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>;</item>
<item>gospel of, in Seneca, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>freedom and necessity, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>;</item>
<item>weakness of its moral theory, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref>;</item>
<item>instantaneous conversion, <ref target="Pg313"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>no intermediate states of character, <ref target="Pg313"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>modifications of, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>;</item>
<item>relation to Cynicism, <ref target="Pg323">323</ref>, <ref target="Pg359">359</ref>;</item>
<item>competing tendencies in, <ref target="Pg324">324</ref>;</item>
<item>the two cities, Zeno on civic duty, <ref target="Pg325">325</ref>;</item>
<item>the brotherhood of man, <ref target="Pg328">328</ref>;</item>
<item>the religion of Stoicism breaks down, <ref target="Pg391">391</ref>, <ref target="Pg512">512</ref>;</item>
<item>later Stoic mysticism, <ref target="Pg392">392</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of Panaetius, <ref target="Pg408">408</ref>, <ref target="Pg530">530</ref>;</item>
<item>its theory of human nature assailed by Plutarch, <ref target="Pg410">410</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>older Stoic belief in a limited immortality, <ref target="Pg500">500</ref>;</item>
<item>ideal of life in M. Aurelius, <ref target="Pg509">509</ref>;</item>
<item>Stoic attitude to augury, etc., <ref target="Pg530">530</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Strabo,
<list rend="nested"><item>on oracles and augury, <ref target="Pg471">471</ref>;</item>
<item>on the temple of Serapis at Canopus, <ref target="Pg461">461</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Suetonius,
<list rend="nested"><item>career of, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</item>
<item>Pliny’s friendship for, <ref target="Pg168"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>a dilatory author, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</item>
<item>superstition of, <ref target="Pg452">452</ref>, <ref target="Pg535">535</ref>;</item>
<item>secretary of Hadrian, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Suffetes, title of, preserved in Africa under the Empire, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref></item>

<item>Suicide,
<list rend="nested"><item>Pliny’s view of, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>;</item>
<item>suicide of Euphrates, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>;</item>
<item>Stoic view of, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>;</item>
<item>suicide of Peregrinus, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref>;</item>
<item>of Silius Italicus, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>;</item>
<item>of Corellius Rufus, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>;</item>
<item>Hadrian’s wish for, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>;</item>
<item>a suicide on Lake Como, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Sulla, recognises the Isiac cult in 80 <hi rend="small">B.C.</hi>, <ref target="Pg565">565</ref></item>

<item>Sulpicia, verses of, mentioned by Martial and Sidonius, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref></item>

<item>Sun worship,
<list rend="nested"><item>the highest form of nature-worship, <ref target="Pg585">585</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>Aurelian’s temple, <ref target="Pg586">586</ref>;</item>
<item>Mithra identified with the Sun at Babylon, <ref target="Pg587">587</ref>;</item>
<item>influence of, in fostering theocratic ideas in the Empire, <ref target="Pg617">617</ref> sq.</item></list></item>

<item>Superstition,
<list rend="nested"><item>tales of, at Trimalchio’s table, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>;</item>
<item>of Regulus, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>;</item>
<item>of Suetonius and Pliny, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</item>
<item>various conceptions of, <ref target="Pg443">443</ref>;</item>
<item>Plutarch on, <ref target="Pg443">443</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>astrology, <ref target="Pg446">446</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>superstition of the Emperors, <ref target="Pg447">447</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>of the great writers of the age, <ref target="Pg451">451</ref> sqq.;</item>
<item>its connection with medicine in the temples, <ref target="Pg459">459</ref>;</item>
<item>dream oracles, <ref target="Pg461">461</ref>;</item>
<item>Aristides has visits from the gods, <ref target="Pg466">466</ref>;</item>
<item>superstition of Rutilianus and the Roman nobles in the reign of M. Aurelius, <ref target="Pg475">475</ref>;</item>
<item>rampant in Paphlagonia, <ref target="Pg476">476</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>cult of <hi rend="italic">Genii</hi>, <ref target="Pg479">479</ref>;</item>
<item>universal belief in miracles, <ref target="Pg482">482</ref>;</item>
<item>apparitions in the <hi rend="italic">Philopseudes</hi> of Lucian, <ref target="Pg490">490</ref>;</item>
<item>encouraged by Mithraism, <ref target="Pg602">602</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Symmachus,
<list rend="nested"><item>religious conservatism of, <ref target="Pg546">546</ref>;</item>
<item>Letters of, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Syncretism,
<list rend="nested"><item>in Aristides, <ref target="Pg388">388</ref>;</item>
<item>in Apuleius, <ref target="Pg388"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>in Plutarch, <ref target="Pg424">424</ref>;</item>
<item>of the oriental worships, <ref target="Pg558">558</ref>;</item>
<item>in the worship of Isis, <ref target="Pg581">581</ref>;</item>
<item>and of Serapis, <ref target="Pg583">583</ref>;</item>
<item>Mithraism the greatest effort of, <ref target="Pg585">585</ref>, <ref target="Pg592">592</ref>;</item>
<item>at Babylon, <ref target="Pg587">587</ref>;</item>
<item>in Asia Minor, <ref target="Pg588">588</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Tacitus,
<list rend="nested"><item>his attitude to the tyranny of the early Caesars, <ref target="Pg21">21</ref>;</item>
<item>early history and experience of, <ref target="Pg22">22</ref>;</item>
<item>various views of, <ref target="Pg23">23</ref>;</item>
<item>the key to his tone as a historian, <ref target="Pg24">24</ref>;</item>
<item>a moralist, rather than a politician, <ref target="Pg25">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg26">26</ref>;</item>
<item>views of the future, <ref target="Pg26">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg27">27</ref>;</item>
<item>belief in birth and traditions, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>;</item>
<item>early training, and ideal of family life, <ref target="Pg28">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>;</item>
<item>admiration for Agricola, <ref target="Pg29">29</ref>;</item>
<item>his experience had affected his ideas of human nature and of the Divine government, <ref target="Pg30">30</ref>;</item>
<item>gloomy view of the time, <ref target="Pg46">46</ref>;</item>
<item>wavering attitude to superstition, <ref target="Pg453">453</ref>, <ref target="Pg535">535</ref>;</item>
<item>faint hope of immortality, <ref target="Pg502">502</ref>;</item>
<item>account of Serapis, <ref target="Pg562">562</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Tarsus, D. Chrysostom on its vices, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref></item>

<item>Taurobolium, the,
<list rend="nested"><item>enthralling power of, <ref target="Pg547">547</ref>;</item>
<item>first glimpse of, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>offered for Ant. Pius in 160, <ref target="Pg549"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>suspected by the Fathers, <ref target="Pg555">555</ref>;</item>
<item>history of, <ref target="Pg556">556</ref>;</item>
<item>Anaitis and Artemis Tauropolus, <ref target="Pg556"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>question whether it became part of the worship of Mithra, <ref target="Pg556"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>, <ref target="Pg609">609</ref>;</item>
<item>its ceremonial and cost, <ref target="Pg557">557</ref> sq.;</item>
<item>its meaning and effects, <ref target="Pg609">609</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Tertullian,
<list rend="nested"><item>his tale of a priest of Cybele, <ref target="Pg549">549</ref>;</item>
<item>on the taurobolium, <ref target="Pg555">555</ref>;</item>
<item>holds up priests of Isis as an example, <ref target="Pg582">582</ref>;</item>
<item>his view of the sacraments of Mithra, <ref target="Pg613">613</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Theagenes,
<list rend="nested"><item>pupil of Peregrinus, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref>;</item>
<item>lectures in Rome, <ref target="Pg354"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref></item></list></item>

<item>Theatre, the, a great corruptor, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref></item>

<item>Thespesius of Soli, his vision of the unseen world, <ref target="Pg524">524</ref></item>

<item>Thrasea, his character, compared with Paetus and Helvidius Priscus, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref></item>

<item>Thrasyllus, an astrologer of Tiberius, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref></item>

<item>Tiberius,
<list rend="nested"><item>conservatism of, in religion, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
<item>little sympathy with Hellenism, <ref target="Pg88">88</ref>;</item>
<item>cost of his gladiators, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;</item>
<item>belief in astrology, <ref target="Pg448">448</ref>;</item>
<item>tried the lottery at Padua, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref>;</item>
<item>persecutes the eastern cults, <ref target="Pg566">566</ref>;</item>
<item>treatment of descendants of Hortensius, <ref target="Pg71">71</ref>;</item>
<item>his <hi rend="italic">mot</hi> on birth, <ref target="Pg70">70</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Timarchus, his visit to the other world, <ref target="Pg526">526</ref> sq.</item>

<item>Titinius Capito, writes a history of the victims of the Terror, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref></item>

<item>Titus,
<list rend="nested"><item>his love of the East and superstition, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref>;</item>
<item>visit to shrine of the Paphian Venus, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Trade,
<list rend="nested"><item>great fair at Cremona, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>;</item>
<item><pb n="639"/><anchor id="Pg639"/>wandering traders, their colleges, <ref target="Pg264"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
<item>immense development of, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref>, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>;</item>
<item>Juvenal’s contempt for, <ref target="Pg98">98</ref>;</item>
<item>encouragement of, by Claudius, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Trajan,
<list rend="nested"><item>provision of, for poor children, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>;</item>
  <item>his friendship with Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref> sq.;</item>
  <item>vows of the Arval Brotherhood for, <ref target="Pg542">542</ref>;</item>
  <item>Pliny’s <hi rend="italic">Panegyric</hi> on, <ref target="Pg43">43</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Travel,
<list rend="nested"><item>became general, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>;</item>
  <item>example of Hadrian, <ref target="Pg205"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>easy and luxurious, <ref target="Pg205"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>facilities of posting, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>;</item>
  <item>speed of, by land and sea, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>;</item>
  <item>passion for change of scene, <ref target="Pg330">330</ref> sqq.;</item>
  <item>travels of Aristides, <ref target="Pg464">464</ref>;</item>
  <item>of Dion Chrysostom, <ref target="Pg368">368</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Trimalchio, the, of Petronius,
<list rend="nested"><item>sketches his own career, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>;</item>
  <item>his estates, <ref target="Pg129"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>description of, <ref target="Pg129"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>surprises of his dinner, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>;</item>
  <item>his libraries and his ignorance, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref>;</item>
  <item>treatment of his wife, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>;</item>
  <item>gives an order for his monument, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Trophonius, the oracle of, <ref target="Pg461">461</ref></item>

</list><list>

<item>Ummidia Quadratilla,
<list rend="nested"><item>character in Pliny’s Letters, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;</item>
  <item>builds a temple and amphitheatre for Casinum, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Varro,
<list rend="nested"><item>theology of, <ref target="Pg417">417</ref>, <ref target="Pg531">531</ref> sq.;</item>
  <item>on Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg547">547</ref>;</item>
  <item>Saturae Menippeae of, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Veleia, tablet of, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref></item>

<item>Verginius, Rufus, guardian of Pliny, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref></item>

<item>Vespasian,
<list rend="nested"><item>accession of, a moral revolution, <ref target="Pg1">1</ref>;</item>
  <item>his economies, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>;</item>
  <item>tolerance of the Stoic opposition by, <ref target="Pg40">40</ref>;</item>
  <item>treatment of astrologers, <ref target="Pg45">45</ref>;</item>
  <item>defamed by men of the Neronian circle, <ref target="Pg52">52</ref>;</item>
  <item>Hellenism of, <ref target="Pg89">89</ref>;</item>
  <item>love of old associations, <ref target="Pg148">148</ref>;</item>
  <item>his immense task; combined economy and liberality, <ref target="Pg148">148</ref>;</item>
  <item>banishes the astrologers, yet believes in them, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref>;</item>
  <item>consults the oracle on Mount Carmel, <ref target="Pg472">472</ref>;</item>
  <item>conservative in religion, <ref target="Pg536">536</ref>;</item>
  <item>restores the shrine of Magna Mater at Herculaneum, <ref target="Pg548">548</ref>;</item>
  <item>consents to work miracles at Alexandria, <ref target="Pg573">573</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Vestinus, Atticus, suicide of, under Nero, <ref target="Pg48">48</ref></item>

<item>Vestinus, Julius, chief pontiff of Egypt, a secretary of Hadrian, <ref target="Pg568">568</ref></item>

<item>Virgil,
<list rend="nested"><item>immense popularity of, his verses in the Graffiti of Pompeii, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>;</item>
  <item>pictures of rural scenery by, <ref target="Pg197">197</ref>;</item>
  <item><hi rend="italic">Sortes Virgilianae</hi> consulted by Hadrian, <ref target="Pg450">450</ref>;</item>
  <item>Inferno of, its discordant conceptions, <ref target="Pg491">491</ref> sqq.;</item>
  <item>recitation of the Aeneid at Trimalchio’s table, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></item></list></item>

<item>Vitellius,
<list rend="nested"><item>cruelty and ghastly end of, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>;</item>
  <item>superstition of, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref>;</item>
  <item>profusion of, <ref target="Pg32">32</ref>;</item>
  <item>treatment of his freedman, Asiaticus, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>;</item>
  <item>employs <hi rend="italic">Equites</hi> as imperial secretaries, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>;</item>
  <item>his horoscope, <ref target="Pg449">449</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Women,
<list rend="nested"><item>high ideal of, in the first century, <ref target="Pg77">77</ref>;</item>
  <item>growth of wider interests in, <ref target="Pg78">78</ref>;</item>
  <item>superstition among, <ref target="Pg78"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>emancipation of, began long before the Empire, <ref target="Pg79">79</ref>;</item>
  <item>vices of, in the time of the elder Cato, <ref target="Pg79"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>Roman ideal of, lasted to the end, <ref target="Pg79"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>cultivated women from Cornelia to Serena, <ref target="Pg80">80</ref>;</item>
  <item>growing influence of, in public life, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref>;</item>
  <item><q>Mothers of the camp, <hi rend="italic">patronae</hi>,</q> <hi rend="italic">Curia mulierum</hi> at Lanuvium, <ref target="Pg81">81</ref>;</item>
  <item>attractions of eastern cults for, <ref target="Pg82">82</ref>;</item>
  <item>Roman girls carefully guarded till marriage, when their perils began, <ref target="Pg84">84</ref>;</item>
  <item>temptations of Roman matrons, <ref target="Pg84"><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></ref>;</item>
  <item>dangers of the Circus, theatre, and gladiatorial shows, <ref target="Pg86">86</ref>;</item>
  <item>manners in the freedwomen class, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>;</item>
  <item>good women of Pliny’s circle, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>;</item>
  <item>others of doubtful character, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>;</item>
  <item>Calpurnia, wife of Pliny; their ideal married life, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref> sq.;</item>
  <item>beautiful character of a girl, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>;</item>
  <item>ideal of, in Seneca, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>;</item>
  <item>light women keep fasts of Isis, <ref target="Pg553">553</ref>, <ref target="Pg565">565</ref>, <ref target="Pg570">570</ref>;</item>
  <item>female worshippers of Magna Mater, <ref target="Pg557">557</ref></item></list></item>

</list><list>

<item>Xenocrates, on bad daemons, <ref target="Pg431">431</ref>, <ref target="Pg433">433</ref></item>

<item>Xenophanes, on legend, <ref target="Pg544">544</ref></item>

</list><list>

<item>Zoticus, freedman of Elagabalus, sources of his wealth, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref></item>

</list>

<p rend="margin-top: 3em; center">THE END</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 3em; center"><hi rend="italic; font-size: small">Printed in Great Britain by</hi> <hi rend="smallcaps">R. &amp; R. Clark, Limited</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Edinburgh</hi>.</p>
                
            </div>
            <div>
            <pgIf output="pdf">
                <then/>
                <else>
                    <div id="footnotes" rend="page-break-before: right">
                        <head>Footnotes</head>
                        <divGen type="footnotes"/>
                    </div>
                </else>
            </pgIf>
            </div>
            <div rend="page-break-before:right; x-class: boxed">
                <index index="pdf" level1="Transcriber's Note"/><index index="toc" level1="Transcriber’s Note"/>
                <head>Transcriber’s Note</head>
                
                <p>The following changes have been made to the text:</p>
            <list>
                <item><ref target="corrxx">page xx</ref>, <q>Pages</q> added before <q>560-584</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr13">page 13</ref>, <q>pannelled</q> changed to <q>panelled</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr14">page 14</ref>, <q>aceticism</q> changed to <q>asceticism</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr16">page 16</ref>, comma changed to semicolon after <q>23</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr30">page 30</ref>, comma added after <q>17</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr33">page 33</ref>, <q>Bossier</q> changed to <q>Boissier</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr53">page 53</ref>, <q>proem.</q> changed to <q>prooem.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr55">page 55</ref>, period added after <q>character</q> and
<ref target="corr55-2">after <q>v</q></ref></item>
                <item><ref target="corr96">page 96</ref>, <q>sick bed</q> changed to <q>sick-bed</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr176">page 176</ref>, period added after <q>Capitol</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr205">page 205</ref>, semicolon added after <q>sq.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr211">page 211</ref>, comma changed to period after <q>Henz</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr212">page 212</ref>, <q>Cæsar</q> changed to <q>Caesar</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr216">page 216</ref>, italics removed from <q>Marq.</q>, 
                <q>wechselude</q> changed to <ref target="corr216a"><q>wechselnde</q></ref></item>
                <item><ref target="corr224">page 224</ref>, period added after <q>wealth</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr228">page 228</ref>, <q>mediæval</q> changed to <q>mediaeval</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr229">page 229</ref>, <q>1</q> changed to <q>i.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr284">page 284</ref>, comma added after <q>Boissier</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr289">page 289</ref>, <q>fuhrt</q> changed to <q>führt</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr300">page 300</ref>, <q>Æneas</q> changed to <q>Aeneas</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr305">page 305</ref>, period changed to comma after <q>Burgmann</q>.
                <ref target="corr305-2">period added</ref> after <q>2</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr312">page 312</ref>, <q>fastidiodosi</q> changed to <q>fastidiosi</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr320">page 320</ref>, <q>intelliges</q> changed to <q>intelleges</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr325">page 325</ref>, italics removed from <q>Laert.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr332">page 332</ref>, comma added after <q>female</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr338">page 338</ref>, <q><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">τά</foreign></q>
                    changed to <q><foreign lang="el" rend="Greek">τὰ</foreign></q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr348">page 348</ref>, <q>Greich.</q> changed to <q>Griech.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr359">page 359</ref>, <q>Phil der.</q> changed to <q>Phil. der</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr397">page 397</ref>, comma changed to period after <q>Saturn</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr405">page 405</ref>, period added after <q><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">παραδιδούς</foreign></q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr407">page 407</ref>, period added after <q>64</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr415">page 415</ref>, <q>xv;</q> changed to <q>xv.;</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr437">page 437</ref>, period added after <q>Diss</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr457">page 457</ref>, p. added before <q>1051</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr459">page 459</ref>, period added after <q>piece</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr464">page 464</ref>, period added after <q><foreign lang="el" rend="Greek">κτλ</foreign></q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr475">page 475</ref>, comma added after <q>23</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr480">page 480</ref>, <q>Aesclepius</q> changed to <q>Asclepius</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr513">page 513</ref>, period removed after <q>Ad</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr517">page 517</ref>, comma added after <q>2</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr524">page 524</ref>, <q>mythopœic</q> changed to <q>mythopoeic</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr550">page 550</ref>, comma added after <q>Foucart</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr556">page 556</ref>, <q>raümliche</q> changed to <q>räumliche</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr557">page 557</ref>, parenthesis removed before <q>Puteoli</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr567">page 567</ref>, <q>Archaeol.</q> changed to <q>Archæol.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr578">page 578</ref>, period added after <q><foreign lang="el" rend="Greek">κτλ</foreign></q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr584">page 584</ref>, comma added after <q>lonely</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr587">page 587</ref>, <q>Mithrasdientes</q> changed to <q>Mithrasdienstes</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr614">page 614</ref>, italics added to <q>Mon.</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr627">page 627</ref>, <q>Caeonius</q> changed to <q>Caeionius</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr628">page 628</ref>, comma added after <q>Aurelius</q> and <ref target="corr628-2"><q>Hadrian</q></ref></item>
                <item><ref target="corr629">page 629</ref>, <q>Mithriac</q> changed to <q>Mithraic</q></item>
                
                <item><ref target="corr633">page 633</ref>, comma added after <q><hi rend="italic">ib.</hi></q></item>
            </list>
                <p>Variations in hyphenation (e.g. <q>springtime</q>, <q>spring-time</q>), capitalisation
                    (<q>inscription</q>, <q>Inscription</q>) and spelling (<q>under world</q>, <q>underworld</q>;
                    <q>mediaeval</q>, <q>medieval</q>; <q>praetorian</q>, <q>pretorian</q>) have not been changed.</p>
            </div>
            <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="pgfooter"/>
    </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
